Vaishampayana said, 'The greatly energetic descendant of the Kourava lineage then spoke these words. "In that
case, I will speak about dharma. My speech and my mind are firm because of your favours. O Govinda! You are
the eternal soul of all beings. O unblemished one! However, King Yudhishthira must ask me about dharma. In that
case, I will be pleased and will speak about dharma. When that rajarshi was born, all the great-souled rishis, with
dharma in their souls, were delighted. Therefore, let Pandava ask me. All the Kurus follow dharma and are blazing
in their fame. But among them, there is no one who is his equal. Therefore, let Pandava ask me. Fortitude, restraint, brahmacharya, forgiveness, power and energy are always found in him. Therefore, let Pandava ask me.
Truthfulness, generosity, austerities, purity, peace, mental vigour and honour-all of these are in him. Therefore,
let Pandava ask me. He does not act in accordance with adharma, for the sake of desire, intolerance, fear or prosperity. He has dharma in his soul. Therefore, let Pandava ask me. He welcomes and treats equally relatives, guests,
servants and those who seek refuge. Therefore, let Pandava ask me. He is always truthtful. He is always forgiving.
He is always learned. He is devoted to guests. He always donates to the righteous. Therefore, let Pandava ask me.
He always observes rites and studies. He always follows dharma. He is peaceful and knows the secrets of the sacred texts. Therefore, let Pandava ask me."

'Vasudeva replied, "Yudhishthira has dharma in his soul and is overcome with great shame. Because he is frightened of a curse, he is not approaching you. O lord of the earth! This protector of the worlds has caused carnage of
the worlds. Because he is frightened of a curse, he is not approaching you. There were those who should be worshipped. There were those who were devoted. There were preceptors, allies and relatives. They deserved to be honoured. But having slain them with arrows, he is not approaching you."

'Bhishma said, "O Krishna! The dharma of brahmanas is donations, studying and austerities. Like that, the dharma of kshatriyas is to give up the body in battle. Fathers, grandfathers, sons, preceptors, allies and relatives advanced against him on a false cause. He followed dharma and killed them in a battle. O Keshava! There may be
wicked seniors who are avaricious and abandon agreements. If a kshatriya kills them in a battle, he is following
dharma. If kshatriya relatives challenge one to a battle, one must always fight. Manu has said that fighting is dharma. It leads to heaven and the worlds."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Bhishma spoke in this way, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira approached humbly and
stood in front, so that he could be seen. He grasped Bhishma's feet and honoured him. He[Bhishma.] inhaled the fragrance
of his[Yudhishthira's.] head and asked him to be seated. Gangeya, bull among all archers, said, "O son[The word used is tata.]! Ask me what you
wish. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Do not be scared."'
