Shounaka asked, 'Why did that tiger among kings, King Janamejaya, decide to have a snake-sacrifice until all the
snakes were destroyed? Why did Astika, supreme among the Brahmanas, save the snakes from the blazing fire?
Whose son was the king who performed the snake-sacrifice? Whose son was that best of the Brahmanas? Tell us.'

Souti said, 'O best of the Brahmanas! O best of the speakers! I shall recount in all its details the great story of
Astika, as it was told. Listen.'

Shounaka said, 'I wish to hear in detail the beautiful story of the ancient and famous Brahmana sage Astika.'

Souti said, 'The wise know this ancient story as history. It was recounted by Krishna Dvaipayana to the inhabitants of the Naimisharanya. At the request of the Brahmanas, my learned father Lomaharshana, Vyasa's disciple
and a suta, once narrated it. O Shounaka! I was present at the time. Since you have asked me, I shall recount the
story of Astika exactly as I heard it.

'Astika's father was as powerful and mighty as Prajapati[The word prajapati means lord of the world and has different nuances. It is a name for Brahma. However,
those who were appointed by Brahma to rule over the worlds are also known as Prajapati. Accordingly, Daksha is
also known as Prajapati and the reference here is to Daksha.]. He was celibate and was always engaged in great
austerities. He was controlled in his food and never spilt his semen. He was known by the name of Jaratkaru. He
was the chief among mendicants[The word used is yayavaras, an expression also used by Jaratkaru's ancestors.], righteous and rigid in his vows. Once, when he was travelling, he saw his ancestors hanging upside down in a great cave, their feet pointing upwards and their heads down. On seeing them
Jaratkaru asked, "Who are you, hanging upside down in this cave, tethered with a rope made of grass that has been
eaten away by rats who secretly live in this cave?" The ancestors replied, "We are rishis rigid in our vows, known
as the yayavaras. O Brahmana! We are descending into the earth because we have no descendants. We only have
one descendant known as Jaratkaru. But unfortunate as we are, that unfortunate one has adopted the path of austerities. Therefore, that fool does not think of having a wife so as to get a son. It is for that reason that we are hanging
upside down in this cave, because we are decaying. Like sinners, despite having a protector, we are unprotected. O
excellent one! Who are you that you are sorrowing for us like a relative? O Brahmana! We wish to know who you
are that you are standing before us mourning, though we deserve to be mourned?" Jaratkaru replied, "I am
Jaratkaru himself and you are my fathers and grandfathers who have come before me. Tell me what I should do."

'The ancestors said, "For your sake and for us, endeavour your best to have a son so that our lineage can continue. O exalted one! Such is the law. From the fruits of virtuous action and from the stored-up merits of austerities
one does not obtain the gains accrued by having a son. Therefore, as we are instructing you, try your best to marry
a wife and have a son. O son! You are our recourse and this will bring us the greatest good."

'Jaratkaru replied, "I have always resolved never to have a wife. But I will take a wife for the sake of your welfare. O ancestors! If I get a girl under my conditions, I will marry her according to the prescribed rites. Her name
has to be the same as mine and her relatives have to willingly bestow her on me as a gift. But who will give a wife
to a poor man like me? However, I will accept a girl who is given to me as alms. O ancestors! I shall go as far as to
marry a wife under these conditions. I shall not act otherwise. O my ancestors! For the sake of relieving you, I
shall have offspring from her so that you may attain the eternal state and be happy there."'

Souti said, 'The Brahmana who was rigid in his vows thereafter roamed the earth in search of a wife. But he did
not get a wife. One day, the Brahmana went into a forest and, remembering the words of his ancestors, thrice
begged for a woman in a faint voice. Thereupon, Vasuki[Vasuki is a great naga or serpent and is the king of the nagas. Vasuki was the rope when the ocean was
churned by the gods and the demons.] appeared and offered his sister to the Brahmana for acceptance. But he did not accept her, because he thought she did not have the same name as his. The great-souled
Jaratkaru had intently thought to himself that he would not accept for a wife someone who did not bear the same
name as his. Then Jaratkaru, of great austerities and of great wisdom, asked, "O snake! Tell me truthfully, what is
your sister's name?" Vasuki replied, "O Jaratkaru! My younger sister's name is also Jaratkaru. Given by me, accept this slender-waisted one as your wife. O best of the Brahmanas! Till now, I have protected her for you. Therefore, take her." O foremost among those who have knowledge of the brahman! In times gone by, the snakes were
cursed by their mother[Kadru and Vinata were daughters of Daksha and were married to the sage Kashyapa. Kadru was the mother of
the snakes and as the story unfolds, we will learn that Kadru cursed her offspring because they did not side with
her in her rivalry with Vinata.] that they would be destroyed in Janamejaya's sacrifice by the one whose charioteer was
the wind[That is, Agni.]. It was to pacify this curse that the best of the snakes[Vasuki.] married his sister to the great-souled rishi of good
vows.

'Accepting her in accordance with the prescribed rites, he[Jaratkaru.] had from her a great-souled son named Astika, great-
souled and an ascetic and learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas. He looked on all the worlds impartially and removed the fear from his father and mother. Then, after a long time, we have heard that a ruler of men[Janamejaya.] from the
Pandava lineage conducted a great sacrifice known as the snake-sacrifice. When the sacrifice for the destruction of
the snakes went on, Astika, of great fame, delivered them from the curse. Saving his maternal uncles, relatives and
other snakes, he then delivered his ancestors by having a son through his ascetic practices. O Brahmana! He freed
himself from their debt through his diverse vows and study of the Vedas. He pleased the gods through sacrifices in
which many offerings were made. He pleased the sages through his celibacy and his ancestors through his progeny.
Jaratkaru and his grandfathers went to heaven.

'After a long time, the noble Jaratkaru, best of the sages, had a son named Astika and after following the righteous path, went to heaven. I have narrated the account of Astika as I heard it. O tiger of the Bhrigu lineage! Now
tell me, what else should I narrate?'
