Vaishampayana said, 'When all the Vrishnis began to repeat words of this nature, Vasudeva uttered words that
were full of dharma and artha. "Gudakesha[Arjuna's name.] has not brought dishonour to our lineage through his actions. There is
no doubt that he has increased it[That is, increased the honour.]. Partha[Partha means Pritha's (Kunti's) son, but is usually used for Arjuna.] knows that the Satvatas[Satvata actually means a follower or worshipper of Krishna. Here it means the Yadavas.] never lust after riches. The Pandava also
knows that the results of a svayamvara are uncertain. Who can contemplate the giving away of a daughter, as if she
were an animal? Which man on earth would like to sell his daughter? I think Kunti's son saw these blemishes in
the other methods. Therefore, in accordance with dharma, the Pandava abducted the lady. This alliance is appropriate. Subhadra is illustrious, Partha is equally so. Hence he abducted her by force. Who will not want Arjuna? He is
born in the lineage of Bharata and the great-souled Shantanu. He is the son of Kuntibhoja's daughter. In all the
worlds, with their Indras and Rudras, I do not see anyone who can vanquish Partha with valour, with that chariot to
which my horses have now been yoked. As a warrior, Partha is swift in the use of weapons. Who is his equal? Go
to Dhananjaya with a happy mind. Pacify him with extremely gentle words and make him come back. That is my
view. If Partha goes to his city after forcibly vanquishing us, our fame will be destroyed. But there is no defeat in
appeasement." O ruler of men! On hearing Vasudeva's words, they acted accordingly.

'Restrained by them, Arjuna returned and married Subhadra. Kunti's son lived there for a year and the lord spent
the last part of his period[Period of exile.] in Pushkara.

'After the twelve years were over, he went to Khandavaprastha. He went to the king[Yudhishthira.] and humbly paid his respects. Partha worshipped the brahmanas and went to Droupadi. Then, out of love[That is, out of jealousy.], Droupadi told Kuru's descendant, "O Kunti's son! Go to the daughter of the Satvatas. A second load always loosens the first tie, however
strong." Krishna[Droupadi.] thus lamented in many ways. Dhananjaya pacified her a lot and asked for forgiveness. He quickly went to Subhadra, who was dressed in red silk. Partha sent her away to dress in garments worn by a cowherd
lady. But the illustrious one looked beautiful even in that attire. Arriving in the best of houses, the famous and
beautiful Bhadra, wife of a warrior, with copper-red eyes, paid homage to Pritha. Then, with a face as radiant as
the full moon, Bhadra quickly went and paid homage to Droupadi, saying, "I am your maid." Then Krishna arose
and embraced Madhava's[Madhava is one of Krishna's names.] sister and lovingly said, "Let your husband not have a rival." With a happy heart,
Bhadra replied, "May it be that way." O Janamejaya! The maharatha Pandavas were then happy in their hearts.
Kunti was also extremely delighted.

'Having heard that Arjuna, the best of the Pandavas, had reached Indraprastha, supreme among cities, the pure-
souled Pundarikaksha[Pundarika is a lotus, usually the white lotus. Pundarikaksha means one with lotus eyes and is Vishnu's name,
used here for Krishna.] Madhava went there with Rama[Balarama.] and all the other warriors and maharathas from among
the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. Shouri, scorcher of enemies, went with a large army, surrounded by hundreds of
soldiers and his brothers and sons. The immensely famous and wise Akrura, lord of donations of alms, vanquisher
of enemies and general of the Vrishni warriors, went there. So did the immensely energetic Anadhrishti and the immensely famous Uddhava, the greatly intelligent and famous disciple of Brihaspati himself. Satyaka, Satyaki, the
Satvata Kritavarma, Pradyumna, Samba, Nishatha, Shanku, the valorous Charudeshna, Jhilli, Viprithu, mighty-
armed Sarana and Gada, supreme among those who are learned-these and many other Vrishnis, Bhojas and Andhakas went to Khandavaprastha, carrying many gifts with them. On hearing that Madhava had come, King Yudhishthira sent the twins[Nakula and Sahadeva.] to receive Krishna. Having been received by them, the prosperous Vrishnis entered
Khandavaprastha, which was adorned with flags and pennants. The roads were cleaned and sprinkled with water
and decorated with many flowers. Cool sandalwood and the fragrance of other pure perfumes and the burning of
aloe made every part of the city fragrant. The entire city was crowded with merchants and with people who had
cleansed themselves.

'The mighty-armed Keshava, supreme among men, arrived with Rama, surrounded by Vrishnis, Andhakas and
the great Bhojas. He was worshipped by thousands of citizens and brahmanas. He then entered the king's palace,
which was like Purandara's[Purandara is Indra's name and means the sacker of cities.] abode. Yudhishthira welcomed Rama in the prescribed fashion. He kissed Keshava
on the head[A more literal translation is that he smelt Krishna's head. This is a sign of affection displayed towards those
who are younger, Krishna being younger than Yudhishthira.] and embraced him in his arms. Extremely pleased, Krishna humbly paid homage and duly paid his
respects to Bhima, tiger among men[Bhima was also older than Krishna.]. In accordance with the prescribed rites, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira welcomed the best of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. He worshipped some as his superiors. He greeted some as his
equals. He welcomed some others with affection and was paid homage to by others[This means those who were younger or inferior to Yudhishthira.].

'Then the immensely famous Vasudeva presented the best of riches to the groom's party and as dowry to Subhadra from her relatives, one thousand golden chariots with nets of bells, each yoked to four horses and driven by
skilled charioteers. From the land of Mathura, Krishna gave one thousand auspiciously coloured cows that were
productive in yielding milk. As a sign of friendship, Janardana gave one thousand horses that were white like the
colour of moonbeams and were adorned with gold; two times five hundred mules, white with black manes, that
were trained and had the speed of the wind; one thousand young and fair women who were well dressed and had
excellent complexions. Each wore a necklace of one hundred gold pieces, was adorned with ornaments and was
skilled in bathing and every kind of service. The lotus-eyed Janardana gave ten man-loads of gold, both worked
and unworked and with the radiance of the fire, from the land of Dasarha. As a mark of respect, the lover of valour,
Rama, gave Partha one thousand supreme elephants in rut. These were as large as mountain peaks and had secretions flowing from their bodies in three streams. They never retreated in battle and were adorned with well-crafted,
golden bells and were supremely saddled. Haladhara was happy and pleased with the alliance. The large quantity
of gems and riches looked like an ocean. The garments and blankets were like the foam, the large elephants were
like large crocodiles and the flags were like aquatic plants. This large river[Of riches.] entered into the ocean of the Pandus
and filled it up to the brim, to the great despondency of their enemies.

'Dharmaraja Yudhishthira accepted all of it and paid homage to the Vrishni and Andhaka maharathas. Then the
assembled great-souled ones, the best of the Kuru, Vrishni and Andhaka lineages, spent their time in pleasure, as
do men of good deeds in the abode of the immortals. The Kurus and the Vrishnis amused themselves as they
wished, with the loud clapping of hands and drinking bouts. Having spent many days in pleasure and being worshipped by the Kurus, the brave ones again returned to the city of Dvaravati. With Rama at their forefront, the maharathas from the Vrishni and Andhaka lineages departed, with the pure jewels given to them by the best of the
Kurus. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But the great-souled Vasudeva remained with Arjuna in the beautiful
city of Shakraprastha[Shakra is another name for Indra. Hence, Shakraprastha means Indraprastha.]. He roamed with Partha along the banks of the Yamuna.

'Then Keshava's beloved sister Subhadra gave birth to radiant Soubhadra, like Poulomi gave birth to Jayanta[Jayanta is Indra's son. Indra's wife is Shachi. Since she is Pouloma's daughter, she is also known as Poulomi.].
He was long-armed, of great strength, with the eyes of a bull and a vanquisher of enemies. Subhadra's brave son, a
bull among men, was known as Abhimanyu. Arjuna's son, a bull among men, was thus known because he was extremely wrathful[Abhi means extreme and manyu means anger.]. Dhananjaya gave birth to that atiratha[An unrivalled warrior, whose valour is unlimited, greater than a maharatha.] from a Satvata lady, like fire is produced at a sacrifice from the womb of a shami[Kind of tree used in sacrifices, said to contain fire in its womb.] tree. At his birth, Kunti's son, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira, donated ten thousand cows and several thousand coins to brahmanas. From his childhood, he became a favourite of Vasudeva's and
was like a moon to all his fathers[In the sense that all the Pandavas were indirectly his fathers.] and the subjects. From his birth onwards, Krishna performed all the auspicious
rites. The child began to grow, like the moon in the bright half of the lunar month. That vanquisher of enemies
learned all the vedas from Arjuna, with the four divisions and the ten branches, and the art of archery, everything
known to man and god. That extremely powerful one became skilled in the science of all weapons. He learnt all
the special acts of handling weapons. In acquisition, use and in circular motions, Dhananjaya was pleased that his
son Soubhadra became his equal. He could bear everything from his enemies. He was blessed with all the auspicious marks. He was invincible in battle and had the shoulders of a bull. His wide mouth was like that of a serpent.
The mighty archer was as proud as a lion. His valour was like that of a mad elephant. His voice was like thunderous clouds. His face was like that of the full moon. He was Krishna's equal in valour, energy, beauty and form.
Bibhatsu[Arjuna's name, meaning the terrible or fearful one.] saw in his son Maghavan[Indra.] himself.

'The auspicious Panchali[Daughter of Panchala, Droupadi.] also obtained five sons through her five husbands. They were brave and bright, like
five mountains-Prativindhya was born from Yudhishthira, Sutasoma from Vrikodara[Bhima.], Shrutakarman from Arjuna, Shatanika from Nakula and Shrutasena from Sahadeva. They were five maharathas. Panchali gave birth to five
heroes, like Aditi gave birth to the Adityas. The brahmanas told Yudhishthira that according to the sacred texts,
Prativindhya would be like the Vindhya mountains in knowledge of the weapons of his enemies and so he should
be thus named[Prati means like or resembling.]. The great archer Sutasoma, with energy equal to that of the sun and the moon, was born as a son
from Bhimasena after he had performed one thousand soma[Soma is the name of a plant and its juice and soma sacrifices are sacrifices at which soma juice is offered.] sacrifices[He should therefore be thus named, the word suta meaning son.]. Shrutakarman was born as a son after
hearing of the great deeds performed by Kiriti[He should therefore be thus named, shruta means heard and karma means deed. Kiriti is one of Arjuna's
names.]. Kourava Nakula, descendant of the Kuru lineage, named his son,
who would extend his fame, after the royal sage Shatanika. Then Krishna gave birth to Sahadeva's son when the
nakshatra Vahnidaivata was in the ascendant. He was therefore known as Shrutasena[This connection is not clear.]. Droupadi's famous sons
were born at intervals of one year. O lord of kings! They were devoted to each other's welfare. O best of the
Bharata lineage! As is prescribed, from the time of birth, their rituals of birth, tonsure and wearing of the sacred
thread were performed by Dhoumya[The family priest.]. After having studied the vedas, these observers of rigid vows learnt the use
of all weapons, human and divine, from Arjuna. O tiger among kings! Followed by mighty and broad-chested sons
who were like those born from the wombs of the gods, the Pandavas were extremely delighted.'
