Vaishampayana said, 'Having stopped lamenting, she seized her husband's feet. The queen sat down, sighed and
looked towards her son. However, King Babhruvahana regained his senses. He saw his mother seated on the
ground in the field of battle and said, "My mother has been reared in happiness. What can be a greater misery
than to see her seated on the ground, next to her brave and dead husband who is lying down? He slew many
brave ones in battle and was supreme among those who wielded all weapons. He has been killed by me in the encounter. It is evident that it is very difficult to die[Otherwise, I should have died.]. This queen's[This probably means Chitrangada, though Ulupi also fits.] heart is extremely firm. Otherwise, it should
have been shattered. She has seen that her mighty-armed and broad-chested husband has been slain. I think it is extremely difficult for people to die until their time has come, since neither I, nor my mother, have been separated
from life. Alas for the brave one's golden armour, lying down on the ground. Behold! It has been pierced by his
son and he has been killed. O brahmanas! Behold. My brave father is lying down on the ground. He is lying down
on a bed meant for heroes. He has been killed by me, his son. The foremost among the Kurus followed the horse
and the brahmanas pronounced benedictions of peace on him. But he has now been slain by me in the battle. O
brahmanas! Instruct me. What atonement should I practise now? I have slain my father in the field of battle and
that is an extremely cruel sin. Having killed my father now and performed this extremely cruel deed, I should hide
my face and roam around, observing extremely difficult austerities for twelve years. I should now wander around,
with my father's skull affixed to my head. For the sake of my father, there is no other atonement that is possible
now. O daughter of the best of serpents! Behold. Your husband has been slain by me. I have slain Arjuna in the
battle and have now accomplished what is agreeable to you. I will now follow the path traversed by my father. O
beautiful one! I am incapable of sustaining myself any longer. My mother and the wielder of Gandiva will also be
dead. O queen! Be delighted. That is the truth you have realized today." Having said this, the king was afflicted by
sorrow and grief. O great king! He touched water and spoke these miserable words. "O all mobile and immobile
creatures! Listen. O mother! O supreme among the serpents! You also listen. I am speaking the truth. If my father,
Jaya, the bull among the Bharata lineage, does not arise, in this field of battle, I will dry up my body. Having slain
my father, I will never be able to escape. Having suffered from the act of having killed a senior, it is certain that I
can visualize hell. If one kills a brave kshatriya, one is freed by giving away one hundred cows. However, having
killed my father, it is extremely difficult for me to escape. Pandu's son, Dhananjaya, was the only one endued with
great energy. He was my father and had dharma in his soul. Therefore, how can there be escape for me?" O king!
The king who was Dhananjaya's son spoke in this way. The immensely intelligent one touched water and was
silent, having decided to fast to death.'
