Yudhishthira said, "I wish to hear everything about the dharma of non-violence and about the qualities of those
who are devoted. O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "In the kingdom of Kashi, a hunter left his village to hunt for deer. He had poisoned arrows
with him. Searching for flesh, the hunter entered a large forest. He saw some deer at a distance and carefully shot
an arrow at them. The weapon was difficult to repulse. However, in that large forest, though it has been released in
order to kill a deer, it missed the target and struck a tree. The powerful poison in the arrow burnt it down. Having
dried up, the tree shed its fruits and leaves. A parrot lived in a hollow in that withered tree. Because of its affection
for the tree, it did not leave its abode. It did not emerge in search of food and starved. It suffered and became feeble. Because it was grateful to the tree, the one with dharma in its soul dried up with it. The chastiser of Paka[Indra.] was
astounded on learning that it looked upon happiness and unhappiness equally. Shakra wondered, 'This bird has
been born as an inferior species. How did it come to resort to non-violence? Or perhaps there is nothing wonderful
in this, since all creatures are everywhere seen to be kindly disposed towards each other.' Thus did Vasava think.

'"Shakra assumed a human form, in the attire of a brahmana. He descended on earth and addressed the bird. 'O
parrot! O best among the birds! Daksha's daughter has indeed had excellent offspring[Daksha's daughters were married to the sage Kashyapa and all creatures were born from these unions. The names
sometimes differ. Usually, the mother of the birds is said to be Daksha's daughter, Tamra or Patangi.]. I wish to ask you a question. Why are you not abandoning this withered tree?' Having been thus asked, the parrot bowed its head down in
obeisance and replied, 'O king of the gods! Welcome. Through my austerities, I know who you are.' The one with
the one thousand eyes exclaimed words of praise. 'The austerities through which it has discerned this deserve to be
honoured.' The destroyer of Bala[Indra killed a demon named Bala.] knew that the parrot was extremely devoted to dharma and that it was the performer of auspicious deeds. However, he still wanted to know why the parrot wouldn't leave. 'This tree is without
leaves and without fruit. It is withered and can no longer be a refuge for birds. Why are you still on this tree? There
are many other trees in this great forest and they have leaves and are full of hollows. In this great forest, there are
many other places where you will find a fortunate spot. This one has lost its lifespan and its capacity. Its essence
has been destroyed. It has lost its prosperity. O wise and patient one! Why are you not abandoning a tree that has
been destroyed and is now fragile?' The parrot, with dharma in its soul, heard the words that Shakra had spoken. It
sighed deeply and spoke these words of distress. 'O Shachi's consort! Destiny cannot be overcome. O lord of the
gods! Listen to the reason why I am still here. I have been born in this tree. All my virtuous qualities result from it.
It protected me well in my infancy and I was not assaulted by my enemies. O unblemished one! Why are you asking questions about the fruits I seek-non-violence, affection and attachment towards those who are devoted? Lack
of anger is a great trait of those who are virtuous. Lack of anger always grants cheer to the virtuous. When there is
a doubt about dharma, it is you whom the gods ask. O god! That is the reason you have been established as a lord
of the gods. O thousand-eyed one! You should not ask me to abandon someone who is devoted to me. When it was
capable, it sustained my life. How can I abandon it now?' At these amiable words, Paka's chastiser was delighted.
He was satisfied with the parrot's non-violence and knowledge of dharma and said, 'O parrot! Ask for a boon.' The
parrot, always devoted to non-violence, asked for the boon that the tree might be revived. Shakra had got to know
about the parrot's firmness and richness of good conduct. Delighted, he quickly sprinkled amrita on the tree. Beautiful fruits, leaves and branches sprouted. Because of the parrot's firm devotion, the tree regained its beauty again.
O  great  king!  Because  of  its  deeds  and  acts  of  non-violence,  when  its  lifespan  was  over,  the  parrot  obtained
Shakra's world. O Indra among men! In this way, those who are devoted become successful in everything, just as
the tree did, through the parrot."'
