'Dhritarashtra asked, "The forefront of my army was shattered and slain by Kiriti. In the battle, who were the
brave ones who advanced against Dhananjaya? Or did they abandon their certain resolution and enter the shakata
vyuha, seeking refuge with the fearless Drona, who was stationed like a wall?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Arjuna shattered your forces then. Brave ones were slain and lost their endeavour. They fled
at that moment. They were slain by the supreme arrows and no one was capable of looking at the son of the chastiser of Paka. O king! Duhshasana, your son, saw the state that the soldiers were in and was filled with great rage.
To fight, he advanced against Arjuna. He was covered in colourful armour made out of gold. The brave one was
extremely valorous and his helmet was made out of god. O great king! Duhshasana surrounded Savyasachi with a
giant army of elephants that seemed to devour the earth. Bells tinkled on the elephants. There was the sound of
conch shells. There was the sound of bows being twanged and the roars of the tuskers. The sound enveloped the
earth, the directions and the sky. That moment was seen to be extremely fierce and terrible. On seeing that these
were angry and were swiftly descending on him, urged by goads, and with extended trunks, like winged mountains, Dhananjaya, lion among men, emitted a giant roar, like a lion. He started to afflict and pierce that army of
elephants with his arrows. It was like a makara penetrating the great ocean, when it is agitated by mighty waves.
Like that, Kiriti penetrated that army of elephants. He was like a scorching sun that rises at the time of the destruction of a yuga, transgressing the normal rules of time[The text uses the word kashtha, which is a small measure of time, and says that the sun was beyond kashtha.
This means that the sun no longer followed the usual times of rising and setting.]. Partha, the destroyer of enemy cities, was seen in all the
directions. There were sounds from the hooves of the horses and the wheels of chariots. Those who were fighting,
roared. There was the twang of bowstrings. There was the sound of Devadatta[Arjuna's conch shell.] and the roar of Gandiva. Elephants lost their speed and were bereft of their senses. Savyasachi's arrows had the touch of virulent serpents and
shattered them. Sharp arrows released from Gandiva pierced the elephants in that battle and there were many hundreds and thousands that afflicted all their limbs. They roared loudly and were killed by Kiriti. They incessantly
fell down on the ground, like mountains with their wings lopped off. Some elephants were pierced with arrows in
the roots of their tusks, their frontal lobes and their temples. They repeatedly shrieked like cranes. Using broad-
headed arrows with straight tufts, Kiriti sliced down the heads of men who were seated on the shoulders of elephants. The heads were adorned with earrings and fell down on the ground. They looked like a mass of lotuses that
Partha was rendering as an offering. Some elephants wandered around in that battle. They possessed harnesses, but
were devoid of armour. They suffered from wounds and blood flowed from these. Men were seen to hang down
from them. Sometimes two or three were pierced with a single arrow that had been released, and fell down on the
ground. With broad-headed and straight-tufted arrows, he severed bowstrings, bows, standards, yokes and headdresses of the opposing rathas. No one could detect a gap between his picking up an arrow and affixing and releasing it. Partha seemed to be dancing around, with his bow stretched in a circle. They were pierced with iron arrows
and vomited blood from their mouths. In an instant, the elephants were seen to fall down on the ground. Many
headless torsos were seen to stand up in every direction. O great king! It was a dreadful carnage. Arms decorated
with golden ornaments were seen to be severed in the battle, with bows, finger-guards, swords and armlets. There
were many shattered seats, housings, headdresses, poles, chariot wheels, axles and yokes. Shields, bows and arrows were strewn around everywhere. Garlands, ornaments, garments and giant standards fell down. Elephants,
horses and kshatriyas were killed and brought down. Because of these, the earth there was seen to be dreadful.
Thus did Kiriti slaughter Duhshasana's army. O great king! They were afflicted and fled, together with their
leader[Duhshasana.]. With his soldiers, Duhshasana was oppressed and terrified. Seeking a protector in Drona, he went to the
shakata vyuha."'
