Vaishampayana said, 'Having returned to Upaplavya from Hastinapura, Keshava, the destroyer of enemies, told
the Pandavas everything that had happened. They spoke to each other for a long time and held repeated consultations. So as to rest, Shouri went to his own residence. After having taken their leave of all the kings, headed by Vi-
rata, when the sun had set, the five Pandava brothers performed their evening prayers. Then their minds turned towards Krishna and they had Dasharha brought for more consultations.

'Yudhishthira asked, "O Pundarikaksha! When you went to Nagapura[Another name for Hastinapura.], what did you tell Dhritarashtra's son in
the assembly hall? You should tell us that."

'Vasudeva replied, "When I went to Nagapura, what I told Dhritarashtra's son in the assembly hall was true,
healthy and beneficial. But the evil-minded one did not accept it."

'Yudhishthira said, "O Hrishikesha! Duryodhana cannot be controlled. When he deviated from the proper path,
what did the grandfather, senior among the Kurus, tell him? What did the mighty-armed preceptor, Bharadvaja,
say? What about our younger father, Kshatta, supreme among those who uphold dharma? Tormented over his
sons[The Pandavas.], what did he tell Dhritarashtra's son? What did all the kings who were in the assembly hall have to say? O
Janardana! Tell us everything, exactly as it happened. You have already told us all the words spoken by the two
foremost among the Kurus[Bhishma and Drona.] to the wicked one who is overcome by desire and avarice and thinks himself to be
wise. O Keshava! But unpleasant things do not remain in my heart. O Govinda! O illustrious one! I wish to hear
their words. O son[The word used is tata.]! Act so that time does not pass. O Krishna! You are our refuge. You are our protector. You are
our preceptor."

'Vasudeva replied, "O king! O Indra among kings! Listen to the words that King Suyodhana spoke to me in the
midst of that assembly of the Kurus. After I had spoken my words, Dhritarashtra's son laughed. Then Bhishma was
extremely enraged and spoke these words. 'O Duryodhana! Listen to my words, for the sake of the welfare of the
lineage. O tiger among kings! Having heard my words, act in the interests of your own lineage. O son[The word used is tata.]! My father
was King Shantanu, famous in the worlds. I was the only son of someone who was the best among all those who
had sons. He began to think, "How can I have a second son? The learned ones say that having a single son is like
having no son at all. How can my lineage not be destroyed? How can the fame continue to be extended?" Having
got to know about his desire, I brought him Kali[Satyavati. Satyavati was dark and was known as Kali (dark) or Gandhakali.] as my mother. For the sake of my father and my lineage, I took
an extremely difficult oath that I would not be a king and would hold up my semen[Not be a father. This was a pledge extracted by Satyavati's father, before Satyavati married Shantanu.]. This is known to you. I have
cheerfully lived here, abiding by my promise. O king! Through her was born my younger brother Vichitravirya,
with dharma in his soul. He was mighty-armed and prosperous and an extender of the Kuru lineage. When my father ascended to heaven, I instated him in my kingdom as a king. I myself behaved like a servant who was inferior
to him. O Indra among kings! After defeating an array of kings, I brought him appropriate wives. You have heard
about this many times. I then confronted Rama in a duel[The Rama in question is Parashurama and the story will be told in Section 60.]. Because of fear of Rama, the citizens banished him
from the city[That is, banished Vichitravirya. The details of this are never known.]. Because of excessive addiction to his wives, he was soon afflicted by pulmonary disease. Without
a king, the lord of the gods no longer rained down on the kingdom. The subjects suffered from hunger and fear and
came and spoke to me.

'"'The subjects said, "All the subjects are decaying. For the sake of our welfare, become our king. O fortunate
one! O extender of Shantanu's lineage! Dispel these calamities. All your subjects are suffering from an extremely
terrible disease. O Gangeya[Ganga's son, Bhishma.]! Only a few ones are left. You should save us. O brave one! Dispel this disease. As is
dharma, protect the subjects. When you are yourself alive, do not let this kingdom head towards destruction."'

'"Bhishma said, 'The lamentations of the subjects failed to move my heart. I remembered that adherence to an
oath is virtuous conduct. O great king! The citizens, my fortunate mother Kali, the servants, the priests, the preceptors and the extremely learned brahmanas were greatly distressed and kept urging me, "Be our king. The kingdom
protected by Pratipa[Shantanu's father.] is being destroyed. O immensely intelligent one! For the sake of our welfare, be our king."

At these words, I joined my hands in salutation. I was unhappy and extremely miserable. O son! I kept repeatedly
telling them about the oath I had taken to honour my father and for the sake of the lineage, that I would hold up my
semen and would not be a king. O king! Then I joined my hands in salutation and repeatedly told my mother, "O
mother! I have been born from Shantanu and will extend the Kuru lineage. It was for your sake that I took the oath
and I cannot falsify it. Even for your sake, do not impose this burden on me. O one who is devoted to her sons! O
mother! I am your servant, awaiting your command." O great king! Having thus entreated my mother and the subjects, together with my mother, for the sake of my brother's wives, I solicited the great sage Vyasa and sought the
rishi's favours for the sake of offspring. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! He showed us his favours and begot three sons[Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura.]. Being blind and deprived of the rites, your father could not be a king. Thus, the great-souled Pandu, famous in the world, became a king. Since he was a king, his sons are the inheritors of their father's share. O
son[The word used is tata.]! Do not quarrel over this. Give them half of the kingdom. As long as I am alive, which man can rule the
kingdom? Do not slight my words. I have always desired peace. O son! O king! I do not differentiate between
them and you. These are also the views of your father, Gandhari and Vidura. The words of the elders should be
heard. Do not ignore my words. Otherwise, you will destroy everybody, yourself and the earth also.'"'
