Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing the two brothers raise their weapons, Jayadratha was extremely miserable. He
wished to live and fled swiftly. But the powerful Bhimasena descended from his chariot and chased the one who
was running away. He angrily grasped him by the hair on his head. Raising him up, he angrily crushed him down
on the ground. Then grasping the king by the neck, he thrashed him. When he had regained his senses, he expressed a desire to rise up. But the mighty-armed one kicked him in the head with his feet. Bhima struck him with
his thighs and his fists. Oppressed by these blows, the king lost consciousness. But Phalguna restrained the angry
Bhimasena, saying, "O Kourava! For Duhshala's sake, remember what the king[Yudhishthira.] has said." Bhimasena replied,
"This wicked and stupid one does not deserve to be alive. This worst of men has oppressed Krishna, who did not
deserve it. How can I possibly do what the compassionate king has said? Out of your childish intelligence, you are
also always trying to restrain me." Having said this, with an arrow that had a head shaped like a half-moon, Vrikodara shaved off his head until there were five tufts of hair left[Leaving five tufts is the standard practice at the time of tonsuring.], though he[Jayadratha.] said nothing. Vrikodara then told the
king, "O stupid one! If you wish to remain alive, listen to what I am telling you. In public gatherings and assemblies, you must say that you are our slave. I will then grant you your life. This is known to be the custom of the
victorious." King Jayadratha was scared for his life and agreed. He told Bhima, tiger among men and one who
makes the field of battle beautiful, that it would be this way.

'Partha Vrikodara then bound him so that he could not move and placed the unconscious one, dirty with dust, on
his chariot. Following Partha's[Arjuna's. Both Bhima and Arjuna are Pritha's sons, or Parthas.] request, he placed him on the chariot and went to the centre of the hermitage,
where Yudhishthira was seated. Bhima displayed Jayadratha, who was in that state. On seeing him in that state, the
king[Yudhishthira.] laughed and said, "Set him free." Bhima told the king, "Tell Droupadi that this evil-minded one has become a slave of the sons of Pandu." Then the eldest brother affectionately replied, "If you have any respect for me,
act so as to set him free." Glancing at Yudhishthira, Droupadi also told Bhima, "Set the king's slave free, the one
you have shaved with five tufts left." The king was freed and he showed his respects to Yudhishthira. In bewilderment, the king[Jayadratha.] honoured all the sages who were there. On seeing Jayadratha held up by Savyasachi, the compassionate King Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, said, "You are free. Go as a free man. But do not act in this way again.
Shame on you. You lusted after a woman. You are mean and your companions are mean. Who but the worst of
men can act in this fashion?" Though he was the performer of an evil act, on seeing him bereft of his senses, the
king who was the foremost of the Bharatas, was moved by compassion. "May dharma increase in your intelligence. May your mind never turn towards adharma again. O Jayadratha! Go in peace, with your horses, your chariots and your infantry." Being thus addressed, he was ashamed. He lowered his face a little and was silent.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Stricken with grief, the king went to Gangadvara and sought refuge with
the god Virupaksha[Shiva. Vrishadhvaja is also Shiva's name. And Shiva is also the three-eyed one.], Uma's consort. He performed great austerities and pleased Vrishadhvaja. Pleased with him,
the three-eyed one accepted his sacrifices in person. The god granted him a boon and he accepted it. Listen to it.

"May I be able to vanquish the five Pandavas, on their chariots, in battle." Thus spoke the king to the god and the
god replied, "No. They are invincible in battle and cannot be killed in battle. But you will be able to restrain them,
except for the mighty-armed Arjuna, whom even the gods find impossible to assail. He is foremost among those
who are skilled in the use of weapons. He is protected by Krishna, known as the one who cannot be vanquished,
and who holds the conch shell, the chakra and the mace." Having been told this, the king went to his own abode.
The Pandavas continued to live in Kamyaka forest.'
