Sanjaya said, "Having heard the words spoken by Krishna to the noble Yudhishthira, Partha became cheerless in
his mind, since he had committed a wicked deed. Vasudeva laughed and spoke to him. 'O Partha! How would you
have felt had you, established in dharma, used you sharp sword to slay Dharma's son? You have only spoken to the
king and are overcome by this lassitude. O Partha! Had you killed the king, what would you have done next? It is
extremely difficult to know dharma, especially by those who are stupid in their understanding. You are scared of
dharma and there is no doubt that you would have suffered greater misery. Had you killed your elder brother, you
would have gone to a terrible hell. The king is foremost among those who uphold dharma. He is devoted to dharma. Pacify the best of the Kurus now. That is my view. Once you pacify him devotedly, King Yudhishthira will be
pleased. We can then swiftly advance towards the chariot of the son of a suta to fight. Karna is extremely difficult
to defeat. But he will be killed by your sharp arrows. O one who grants honours! Dharma's son will be filled with
great delight. O mighty-armed one! It is my view that the time has come for this. Having accomplished this task,
your objective will be attained.' O great king! O unblemished one! At this, filled with shame, Arjuna touched
Dharmaraja's feet with his head. He repeatedly said, 'O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Forgive me. O king!
Pardon what I have spoken because of my fear about dharma.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira saw that Dhananjaya, the destroyer of enemies, was prone at his feet and was weeping.

' "King Dharmaraja raised his brother, Dhananjaya. Having embraced him with affection, the lord of the earth
wept. Those two immensely radiant brothers wept for a long time. Having overcome their sorrow, those two tigers
among men became cheerful again. He affectionately inhaled the fragrance of Pandava's head[Yudhishthira inhaled the fragrance of Arjuna's head.]. Filled with
great delight, he smiled and spoke to Jaya[Jaya is one of Arjuna's names, as is Vijaya.]. 'O mighty-armed one! O great archer! Though I made every effort
in the battle, while all the soldiers looked on, Karna used his arrows to deprive me of my armour, my standard, my
bow, my javelin, my horses and my club. O Phalguna! Having known and seen his deeds in the battle, I have been
overcome with great grief and am no longer fond of remaining alive. O brave one! If you do not kill the son of a
suta today, I will give up my life. What is the point of my remaining alive?' O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Having been thus addressed, Vijaya replied, 'O king! O best of men! O lord of the earth! Through your favours, I
swear on you, Bhima and the twins that I will slay Karna in the battle today, or be killed by him. I swear on my
weapons that I will bring him down on the ground.' Having spoken these words to the king, he spoke these words
to Madhava. 'O Krishna! There is no doubt that I will slay Karna in the battle today. O fortunate one! With your
blessings, the death of that evil-souled one is certain.' O supreme among kings! Having been thus addressed, Keshava spoke to Partha. 'O foremost among the Bharata lineage! You are capable of doing this. O maharatha! This
has always been my desire. I have always thought about the means whereby you can kill Karna in the battle.' The
intelligent Madhava again spoke to Dharma's son. 'O Yudhishthira! You should console Bibhatsu. With your permission, he will kill the evil-souled Karna today. O descendant of the Pandava lineage! On hearing that you were
afflicted by Karna's arrows, we returned here to ascertain your welfare. O king! It is through good fortune that you
are well and have not been seized. O unblemished one! For the sake of Bibhatsu's victory, console him.' Yudhishthira replied, 'O Partha! O Bibhatsu! O Pandava! Come and embrace me. You spoke beneficial words to me.
You have been forgiven by me. O Dhananjaya! I give you permission to go and kill Karna. O Partha! Do not be
angry at the terrible words that I have spoken to you.' O king! O venerable one! At this, Dhananjaya bowed his
head down before his elder brother and grasped his feet with his hands. The king raised the sorrowing one and embraced him.

' "He inhaled the fragrance of his head and again spoke these words. 'O Dhananjaya! O mighty-armed one! I
have been greatly honoured by you. May you again attain victory and eternal greatness.' Arjuna replied, 'Radheya
is evil in his deeds and insolent about his strength. I will approach him in the battle and slay him, and his relatives,
with arrows. He stretched a firm bow and afflicted you with arrows. Karna will reap the terrible consequence of
that deed today. O lord of the earth! Having slain Karna today, I will return to you. I will give you the good news
and follow you. I tell you this truthfully. Without killing Karna today, I will not return I am touching your feet and
telling you this truthfully.' Having pacified Dharmaraja, Partha was cheerful in his mind. Prepared to kill the son of
a suta, Partha spoke to Govinda. 'Prepare the chariot again and yoke the best of horses. Let the great chariot be
equipped with all the weapons. Get horse riders to cover the well-trained horses. Let all kinds of equipment quickly be arranged on the chariot.' O great king! Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Phalguna, Krishna
told Daruka[Krishna's charioteer.], 'Do everything that Arjuna, foremost among the Bharatas and best among all archers, has asked
to be done.' O supreme among kings! Having been instructed by Krishna, Daruka yoked and covered the chariot,
which scorched the enemy, with the skins of tigers. The chariot was yoked by the great-souled Daruka. He[Arjuna.]
sought Dharmaraja's leave and the blessings of the brahmanas. With auspicious rites and benedictions, he ascended that supreme chariot. The immensely wise King Dharmaraja Yudhishthira blessed him, supremely delighted at
the prospect of Karna's death.

' "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the great archer depart, all the beings thought that Karna had
already been slain by the great-souled Pandava. O king! On every side, all the directions sparkled. O lord of men!
At that time, blue jays, shatapatras[We have deliberately not translated shatapatra. Literally, it means a bird
with one hundred feathers and can stand for a parrot, a woodpecker or a
crane. Since this circumambulation took place in a clockwise direction
(pradakshina), this was an auspicious sign.] and curlews circumambulated the descendant of the Pandu lineage. There
were many other sacred and auspicious male birds[The text says pumnamam and it is difficult to pin this bird down. Literally, this should be translated as a bird name pum. However, this isn't an
easily identifiable bird and pum also means male. Perhaps that itself was
an auspicious sign.]. They were cheerful in form and seemed to urge Arjuna to
hurry to the field of battle. O lord of the earth! Herons, vultures, crows and wild crows advanced in front of him,
wishing to devour[These carnivorous birds fed on dead bodies.], and signified an ominous portent. The signs were good and auspicious for Partha. They signified the destruction and death of Karna's soldiers. As Partha advanced, he perspired copiously. He was extremely
anxious about how he would accomplish his objective.

' "On seeing that Partha was overcome with anxiety as he proceeded, Madhusudana spoke to the wielder of
Gandiva. 'O wielder of Gandiva! With this bow, you have defeated those in battle, whom no other man is capable
of vanquishing. We have seen many brave ones, equal to Shakra in their valour. Having encountered you in a battle, those brave ones have attained the supreme objective. O venerable one! Whether it is Drona, Bhishma, Bhagadatta, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, Sudakshina from Kamboja, Shrutayusha and the immensely valorous
Achyutayusha, none of them have been able to do anything against you. There is no one who can withstand you.
You possess celestial weapons. You are dexterous and strong. O Arjuna! You aim, strike and hit the target with
yoga. You are not confused in a battle and know about what must be done. You are capable of killing all the gods
and asuras, together with everything mobile and immobile. O Partha! There is no warrior or man on this earth who
is equal to you in a battle. There are kshatriyas who pick up bows and are invincible in battle. But I have not seen,
or heard of, anyone like you among them, or among the supreme gods. Brahma, the creator of all beings, constructed the extremely wonderful Gandiva[This is slightly inaccurate. Gandiva was created by the brahman,
though Brahma owned it for one thousand years.]. O Partha! This is what you use to fight and that is the reason there
is no one who is your equal. O Pandava! However, I must speak words that are beneficial for you. O mighty-armed
one! Do not think lightly of Karna. He is the ornament of a battle. Karna is strong and insolent. He is skilled in
weapons and a maharatha. He is accomplished and colourful in fighting. He knows about time and place[With reference to fighting.]. He is
like the fire in his energy. He is like the wind in his speed. He is like Yama in his anger. The powerful one is capable of withstanding a lion. The mighty-armed one's chest is one aratni in breadth[Aratni is a measure of distance, the length of an elbow, that is, a cubit.
It is thus eighteen inches long.]. He is extremely difficult to
defeat. He is very proud and brave. He is extremely valiant and handsome. He has all the qualities of a warrior and
is terrible to his enemies. He has always hated the Pandavas and has been engaged in the welfare of the sons of
Dhritarashtra. Radheya cannot be killed by any enemy, even the gods, including Vasava. In my view, you are the
only exception. Today, slay the son of a suta. All the warriors made out of flesh and blood, and even the gods, are
incapable of defeating him in a battle, even if they were to unite. The evil-souled one is wicked in intelligence. He
is cruel. His evil intelligence has always been used to bring injury to the Pandaveyas. He has opposed the Pandaveyas. Kill Karna today and accomplish your objective. He thinks himself to be brave, as does the wicked Suyodhana. He is the root of all wickedness. O Dhananjaya! Defeat the son of a suta.'" '
