'Vidura said, "Gambling is the root of all quarrels. Its consequence is dissension and great wars. Taking recourse to
it, Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra's son, creates terrible enmity. Because of Duryodhana's crime, all the descendants of
Pratipa[Shantanu's father.] and Shantanu, together with their terrible armies and with the descendants of the Bahlikas, will be destroyed. Like an angry bull that breaks its own horns forcibly, Duryodhana's stupidity will drive safety away from
this kingdom. O king! A brave and wise man who disregards his sagacity and follows another's mind, is like one
who goes to the sea in a boat guided by a child and is immersed in terrible affliction. Duryodhana is gambling with
Pandava and it pleases you because you think he is winning. But in this overdone deed is created a war that will
lead to the destruction of all men. This badly designed act will lead to a decline in fruits. In the heart of the one
who has resorted to counsel, there is great composure[Without reproducing the Sanskrit, this is an impossible sentence (half of a shloka) to translate, because the
meaning is obscure. In all probability, it is a reference to Yudhishthira, who is composed.]. Friendship with Yudhishthira will lead to good fruit.
Through pacification, the one with the excellent bow[Probably a reference to Arjuna.] will no longer exhibit enmity. O descendants of Pratipa!
O descendants of Shantanu! O kings! Listen to Kavya's words and do not cross the limits. The terrible fire has
blazed forth. Extinguish it before there is a war. If Pandava Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira's name.] is defeated in dice and his anger is not
pacified by Vrikodara, Savyasachi and the twins, there will be no refuge in the terrible onslaught that will ensue. O
great king! You are a source of great riches, as much as you desired, even before this game. Even if you win great
riches from the Pandavas, what is the gain? Pritha's sons are the source of wealth. We all know Soubala's skills in
the game. This one from the mountains[Shakuni was from Gandhara, a mountainous region.] knows techniques of deceit with dice. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Let Shakuni return whence he came. The one from the mountains fights with the powers of maya."'
