Vaishampayana said, 'Rajarshi Yudhishthira's relatives had been slain. The sages, rich in austerities, used many
kinds  of  words  to  comfort  him.  He  was  entreated  by  the  illustrious  Vishtarashrava  himself,  Krishna  Dvaipayana, the lord Devasthana, Narada, Bhima, King Nakula, Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.], Sahadeva, the intelligent Vijaya[Arjuna.] and many
other tigers among men and brahmanas who were learned about the sacred texts. He was thus relieved of his sorrow, grief and mental depression. Yudhishthira worshipped the gods and the brahmanas. The king again performed
the funeral rites for his dead relatives. The one with dharma in his soul ruled the earth, right up to the frontiers of
the ocean. Having obtained only his own kingdom[With its limited riches. Hence, 'only'.], Kouravya's mind was tranquil. The king spoke to Vyasa,
Narada and the others. "I have been comforted by the aged ones who are bulls among sages. I do not have the
slightest bit of affliction left. I have also obtained a great deal of riches, with which, I can sacrifice to the gods.
With you at the forefront, I will perform the sacrifice. O grandfather[This is being addressed to Vedavyasa.]! We will go to what is protected in the Himalayas. O supreme among brahmanas! We have heard that the region is extremely wonderful. O illustrious one!
You have spoken a lot about that colourful and fortunate spot and so have devarshi Narada and Devasthana. But no
man can go there without the sanction of the gods and the preceptors, without honouring virtuous well-wishers.
Otherwise, he will face hardships." The king said this to all the maharshis, who took the permission of the king and
that of Krishna and Phalguna, and while everyone looked on, instantly vanished. The king, the lord who was Dharma's son, remained seated. They spent a long period of time there. They performed the purification rites for the
slain Bhishma. In the course of the funeral rites, they gave many gifts to brahmanas. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! With Dhritarashtra, they donated at the funeral rites of the Kurus, Bhishma and Karna being the foremost.
The bulls among the Pandavas gave many riches to brahmanas. Then, with Dhritarashtra at the forefront, they entered Gajasahvya[Hastinapura.]. With his brothers, the one with dharma in his soul ruled the earth. He comforted his father, the
lord for whom his wisdom was his sight.'
