'Sanjaya said, "O king! When the night had passed, Bharadvaja's maharatha son spoke to King Suyodhana. 'I have
made arrangements for the masses of samshaptakas to be engaged with Partha.' When Partha had left to battle with
the samshaptakas and kill them, Drona and his battle formation advanced against the great army of the Pandavas.
O best of the Bharata lineage! He advanced, wishing to capture Dharmaraja. On seeing that Bharadvaja's son had
arranged his vyuha in the form of a Garuda[The text uses the word Suparna, which is the same as Garuda.], Yudhishthira created a counter-vyuha that was in the form of a half-
circle. Bharadvaja's maharatha son was himself stationed in the mouth of the Suparna. King Duryodhana was at
the head, with his brothers and followers. Kritavarma and the supremely radiant Goutama[Kripa.] were the eyes.
Bhutavarma, Kshemasharma, the valiant Karakarsha, Kalingas, Simhalas, those from the east, brave Abhiras,
Dasherakas, Shakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, Hamsapadas, Shurasenas, Daradas, Madras and Kekayas, with hundreds
and thousands of elephants, horses, chariots and infantry, were stationed at the neck. Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya,
Somadatta and Bahlika-these brave ones were surrounded by one akshouhini and resorted to the right flank. Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti and Sudakshina from Kamboja were stationed on the left flank, with Drona's son
stationed at the forefront. Kalingas[The Kalingas were divided into various segments.], Ambashthas, Magadhas, Poundras, Madrakas, Gandharas, Shakunis, those
from the eastern regions[As with the Kalingas, there is repetition here too.], those from the mountainous regions and the Vastayas were at the rear. Vaikartana Karna, with his sons, kin and relatives, was at the tail, surrounded by a large army that raised many different kinds of
standards. Jayadratha, Bhimaratha, Samyati, Triksabha, Jaya, Bhuminjaya, Vrisha, Kratha and the immensely
strong Naishadha were surrounded by a large army and placed the world of Brahma as the objective[That is, they were prepared to die.]. O king!
They were skilled in war and placed themselves in the centre of the vyuha. The vyuha constructed by Drona had
foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants. It was seen to be as turbulent as an ocean lashed by a storm. Those
wishing to do battle emerged from its flanks and its sides. They were like clouds tinged with lightning, emerging in
all the directions during summer. O king! Pragjyotisha[Bhagadatta.] was resplendent in the midst, astride an elephant that had
been properly prepared. He looked like the rising sun. The king was adorned with garlands and a white umbrella
was above his head. He looked like the full moon, in conjunction with Krittika[The third of the twenty-seven nakshatras, Pleiades.]. The elephant was blind with
madness and was like a gigantic mountain, on which giant clouds were showering down. It looked like a mass of
collyrium. He[Bhagadatta.] was surrounded by many brave kings from the mountainous regions, adorned with diverse
weapons, and was like Shakra, surrounded by masses of gods.

'"Yudhishthira saw that superhuman vyuha, incapable of being vanquished by enemies in battle. He spoke these
words to Parshata. 'O lord! Your horses have the complexion of pigeons[They are white.]. Determine a policy so that I am not
captured today by the brahmana.' Dhrishtadyumna replied, 'O one who is excellent in vows! No matter how hard
Drona tries, he will not be able to bring you under his control. I will check Drona today, together with his followers. O Kouravya! As long as I am alive, you should not be anxious. Drona will never be able to defeat me in
battle.' Having said this, Drupada's powerful son, with horses that had the hue of pigeons, released arrows and
himself attacked Drona. On seeing the evil omen of Dhrishtadyumna stationed before him[Dhrishtadyumna was destined to kill Drona.], Drona instantly became distressed. On seeing this, your son Durmukha, the destroyer of enemies, wished to do that which would
bring pleasure to Drona and countered Dhrishtadyumna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A terrible battle
raged between the brave Parshata and Durmukha and they were each other's equal. Parshata swiftly enveloped
Durmukha with a net of arrows and countered Bharadvaja's son with a great shower of arrows. On seeing that
Drona had been sorely countered, your son confounded Parshata with a shower of many different kinds of arrows.
While the one from Panchala and the foremost among the Kurus were thus engaged in battle, Drona killed many of
Yudhishthira's soldiers with arrows. They were routed in diverse directions, like clouds by the wind. Partha's soldiers were thus scattered.

'"For a short while, the encounter seemed to be pleasant. O king! But it then became violent and no consideration was shown to anyone. O king! As they fought each other, they could not distinguish friend from foe. The battle raged on, on the basis of guessing and signs. The rays of the sun reflected on the gems on headdresses, necklaces, ornaments, swords and shields and they assumed the complexion of the sun. The chariots, elephants and
horses streamed banners and seemed to assume the form of clouds, with flocks of cranes in them. Men killed men.
Horses fiercely killed horses. Charioteers killed charioteers and elephants killed supreme elephants. In a short instant, there was a terrible and fierce encounter between elephants and other supreme elephants, all bedecked with
pennants. As they rubbed their bodies against each other and clashed against each other with their tusks, flames
tinged with smoke arose from the friction. Because of the fire generated from the tusks, the standards were brought
down. They looked like masses of resplendent clouds in the sky, tinged with lightning. The earth was strewn with
elephants that roared as they were brought down, like clouds shrouding the autumn sky. The elephants were
slaughtered with showers of arrows and javelins and roared, like clouds during a deluge. Some supreme elephants
were struck with arrows and javelins and were terrified. Others shrieked and fled, frightening all beings. Some elephants were wounded by the tusks of other elephants. They roared in tones of woe, like clouds at the time of a terrible calamity. Some elephants were driven back by other supreme elephants. But urged by excellent goads, they
returned to the battle. Elephant-riders struck elephant-riders with arrows and javelins. With weapons and goads
dislodged, they fell down from the backs of elephants to the ground. Many elephants were bereft of their riders and
wandered in different directions. They fell down when they encountered each other, like scattered clouds. They
bore slain drivers and the best of warriors. Those giant elephants wandered in all the directions, as if they were
solitary[The word used is ekachara. The elephants were solitary, as if they had lost their herds. Ekachara also means a
rhinoceros. Therefore, an alternative translation is also possible. The elephants wandered around, like rhinos.]. Some elephants were attacked. Others were attacked with javelins, swords and battleaxes. They uttered
roars of distress and fell down. Bodies that were like mountains fell down suddenly. The earth was suddenly struck
and quaked, and seemed to be shrieking. The earth was strewn in every direction with warriors, elephant-riders,
pennants and elephants and was beautiful, as if it was covered with hills. In that battle, elephant-riders on elephants
were pierced in their hearts. Charioteers were brought down with broad-headed arrows and lances and goads were
strewn around. Other elephants were wounded with iron arrows and shrieked like cranes. They fled in the ten directions, crushing foes and friends. O king! The earth was covered with masses of elephants, horses, charioteers
and their bodies and the slush of flesh and blood. Chariots, with wheels and without wheels, and with the maharathas, were uprooted by elephants with the tips of their tusks. Chariots were bereft of charioteers and elephants
were bereft of riders. With their riders slain, horses and elephants fled in different directions, afflicted by the arrows. The father killed the son and the son killed the father. In that tumultuous battle, nothing could be distinguished. In that slush of blood, men sank down, up to their ankles. They were as dazzling as giant trees in a conflagration. The garments, armour, umbrellas and standards were all seen to be drenched red in blood. Masses of horses, masses of chariots and masses of men were brought down. They were again crushed into many pieces by the
wheels of chariots. The soldiers were like an ocean. The masses of elephants were the mighty currents. The slain
men were the moss. The masses of chariots were eddies. Desiring victory and prosperity, warriors immersed themselves in that ocean, using their mounts as large boats, and sought to confound the others[The enemy.]. Each of those warriors
was covered with a shower of arrows, but did not deviate from the objective. Though they lost their signs[They lost their standards and the signs of belonging to specific divisions.], they
did not lose heart. In that terrible and fearful battle, Drona confounded the enemy and rushed towards Yudhishthira."'
