'"Bhishma said, 'O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In my view, Shikhandi, the destroyer of enemy
cities and the son of the king of Panchala, is a foremost ratha on Partha's side. He will fight in the battle, destroying the earlier state of affairs[In the earlier state of affairs, Shikhandi was a woman. The story will be recounted in Section 60.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He will establish his supreme fame among
your soldiers. He has many soldiers, among the Panchalas and the Prabhadrakas. He will perform great deeds with
his array of chariots. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhrishtadyumna is the overall commander of all the soldiers. O Indra among kings! It is my view that he is an atiratha. He is the student of Drona, a maharatha. He will
fight in the war, destroying the enemies in battle, like the illustrious Pinaki[The wielder of the pinaka, Shiva.], when he is enraged at the destruction
of an era. Those who love war talk about his array of chariots. They are as extensive as the ocean and are like the
masses of gods in battle. O king! O Indra among kings! In my view, Dhrishtadyumna's son, Kshatradharma, is
equal to half a ratha. He is young and still lacks in training. Shishupala's brave son, Dhrishtaketu, is the king of
Chedi and is a maharatha. He is a great archer and has a matrimonial alliance with the Pandavas[Dhrishtaketu's sister was Karenumati and she was married to Nakula.]. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Together with his sons, the brave lord of Chedi will perform great exploits that will be difficult even for a maharatha to accomplish. O Indra among kings! It is my view that Kshatradeva, the destroyer of
enemy cities, is devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas and is a supreme ratha on the side of the Pandavas. Jayanta,
Amitouja and Satyajit are maharathas. All these great-souled ones, supreme among the Panchalas, are maharathas.
O son[The word used is tata.]! They will fight in the battle, like enraged elephants. Aja and Bhoja are valiant maharathas on the Pandava
side. They will strive to their utmost capacity to help the Pandavas. They are swift in the use of weapons. They are
colourful in battle. They are skilled. They are firm in their valour. O Indra among kings! The five brothers from
Kekaya are indomitable in war. All of them are foremost among rathas and all of them have red flags. Those with
the names Kashika, Sukumara, Nila, King Suryadatta, Shankha and Madirashva are foremost among rathas and all
of them possess the signs of battle. They are skilled in the use of all weapons. It is my view that all of them are
great-souled. It is my view that King Chitrayudha is a supreme ratha. He adorns the field of battle and is devoted to
Kiriti. Chekitana and Satyadhriti are maharathas on the Pandava side. It is my view that those two tigers among
men are foremost among rathas. O Indra among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is no doubt in
my mind that Vyaghradatta and Chandrasena are foremost among rathas. O Indra among kings! Senabindu, who
has the name of Krodhahanta, is a lord who is the equal of Vasudeva and Bhimasena. In the course of the battle, he
will fight valiantly with your soldiers. You should think of himself as a supreme ratha, proud in battle, and equal to
Drona, Kripa and I myself. The king of Kashi is extremely swift in the use of weapons and can be prided on being
a supreme ratha. He is the vanquisher of enemy cities and it is my view that he possesses the qualities of a single
ratha. Drupada's young son, Satyajit, is valorous and proud in battle and is the equal of Dhrishtadyumna. He
should be counted as an atiratha. He desires fame and will perform supreme deeds for the Pandavas. There is another great and brave ratha who is skilled and is devoted to the cause of the Pandavas. He is extremely brave and
he is the king of Pandya. He is a great archer and is firm in wielding the bow. He is a supreme ratha on the Pandava
side. O foremost among Kouravas! Both Shreniman and King Vasudana are atirathas. O scorcher of enemies! That
is my view.'"'
