'Yudhishthira said, "The brahmana rishis, ancestors and gods all praise the dharma of truth. O grandfather! I wish
to hear about the truth. Tell me about it. O king! What are the signs of the truth? How can it be obtained? Having
obtained truth, what does one become? How is all this spoken of?"

'Bhishma replied, "The mixing of the dharma of the four varnas is not praised. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without any distortion, truth exists in all the varnas. For the virtuous, truth is always dharma. Truth is the
eternal dharma. It is truth that one should bow down to. Truth is the supreme objective. Truth is dharma, austerities
and yoga. Truth is the eternal brahman. Truth is said to be the supreme sacrifice. Everything is established in the
truth. In this world, truly and in proper order, I will tell you about the conduct associated with truth. In proper order, I will tell you about the characteristics associated with truth. You should hear about how truth can truly be acquired. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In all the worlds, there are thirteen kinds of truth. There is no doubt
that truth is impartiality and self-control. There is also lack of malice, forgiveness, modesty, patience, lack of envy,
renunciation, meditation, wisdom, fortitude, constant adherence and non-violence. O Indra among kings! These are
the thirteen forms of the truth. The truth is described as immutable. It never undergoes a transformation. It is not
against any kind of dharma and it can be obtained through yoga. There must be impartiality towards the desirable
and the undesirable, towards one's own self and towards the enemy. When preference and aversion are destroyed,
desire and anger are also destroyed. Self-control means one doesn't desire the possessions of others. There is always patience and gravity. There is fearlessness and the pacification of anger. All of these are obtained through
knowledge. The learned say that lack of malice manifests itself in generosity and control in the practice of dharma.
Those who always base themselves on the truth do not suffer from malice. The virtuous person forgives everyone
-those who should be forgiven and those who should not be forgiven, those who are liked and those who are not
liked. The virtuous obtain the truth. They do good in secret ways. The modest person never boasts. The dharma of
modesty can always be obtained through restraint in speech. The form of forgiveness that is indulged in for the
sake of dharma or artha is said to be endurance. This is for the propagation of the worlds and is obtained through
patience. If a person renounces affection, if a person renounces objects and if a person gives up love and hatred, he
becomes one who renounces-not otherwise. If a person makes efforts to undertake good deeds, without making it
obvious and without any attachment, that is said to be nobility among beings. There is fortitude when one does not
perform perverse deeds, whether it is in a situation of happiness or unhappiness. A wise person who desires his
own prosperity must always pursue this. One must always have sentiments of being forgiving. One must be devoted to the truth. Devoid of delight, fear and anger, a learned person obtains fortitude. Lack of hatred towards all beings, in deeds, thought and words, kindness and generosity-these are the eternal dharma of the virtuous. These
are the thirteen separate characteristics of the truth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These forms of truth are
worshipped and extended. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is impossible to speak about the infinite qualities
of the truth. That is the reason truth is praised by the brahmanas, the ancestors and the gods. There is no dharma
superior to the truth. There is no sin that is worse than falsehood. Truth is the foundation of dharma. That is the
reason truth must not be destroyed. The giving of gifts, sacrifices with dakshina, vows, agnihotra sacrifices, the
Vedas and other manifestations of dharma result from the truth. One thousand horse sacrifices and truth were held
up on a weighing scale and truth surpassed the one thousand horse sacrifices."'
