Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard that Vidura had returned and that he had been pacified by the king[Dhritarashtra.], the evil-
minded king who was Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.] burnt with anger. Darkness having entered his mind, the king summoned Soubala, Karna and Duhshasana and told them these words, "The adviser honoured by Dhritarashtra has
returned. The learned Vidura is a well-wisher of the sons of Pandu and is always devoted to their welfare. Advice
me about what is in my welfare, so that Vidura does not influence his[Dhritarashtra's.] intelligence to again bring the Pandavas
back. If I again see the Parthas return here in some way, I will certainly dry up, without life and without riches. I
will consume poison or hang myself, or use a weapon or enter the fire. I will never again be able to witness their
prosperity."

'Shakuni replied, "O king! O lord of the earth! Why are you falling prey to these childlike thoughts? They have
gone after an agreement. Therefore, their return won't happen. O bull among the Bharata lineage! All the Pandavas
are always established in the truth of their words. O son! They will never accept your father's words. If however
they accept them and return again to the city, thus violating the agreement, we will again play, staking everything.
Apparently obedient to the king[Dhritarashtra.] and maintaining a middle position[That is, a neutral position.], we will protect ourselves and wait to see
many weaknesses emerge in the Pandavas."

'Duhshasana said, "O immensely intelligent maternal uncle! It will be exactly as you say. The intelligent words
you utter have always pleased me."

'Karna said, "O Duryodhana! All of us always try to accomplish what you desire. O king! I notice that all of us
are united in our view."

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed by Karna, King Duryodhana then turned his face away, without being greatly happy. On realizing this, Karna opened his radiant eyes wide. In great anger, he aroused himself,
and spoke to Duhshasana and Soubala in wrath, "O lords of men! Listen to my true views. With servile hands, we
are trying to do everything that pleases the king[Duryodhana.]. But while remaining stationary, we cannot always bring him
pleasure. Let us now grasp our armour and weapons and mounting our chariots, go together and kill the Pandavas,
who are roaming in the forest. When they have all been pacified and have left for the unknown journey[When the Pandavas have been killed.], we and
Dhritarashtra's sons will be unchallenged. As long as they are distressed and as long as they are immersed in grief,
as long as they are without allies, till then, we can do this. This is my view." Having heard these words, they applauded them repeatedly. All of them then praised the suta's son, saying that his words were excellent. Having said
this, all those angry ones separately mounted their chariots. They then set out in a body, having made up their
minds to kill the Pandavas. The pure-souled and illustrious lord Krishna Dvaipayana[Vedavyasa.] saw this with his divine
sight and got to know about their departure. He is the illustrious one who is worshipped by all the worlds. He came
to them and restrained them. He then swiftly went to the place where the one whose wisdom was his sight[Dhritarashtra.] was
seated, and spoke to him.'
