Vaishampayana said, 'There the valorous one engaged in the best of austerities and soon became a favourite of the
siddhas and the charanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was devoted to service, had no ego, was disciplined and was in control of his senses. Through his own power, he went to heaven. To some, he was a brother. To
some others, he was a friend. Other rishis protected him like a son. O bull among the Bharata lineage! After a long
time, Pandu attained such great heights of pure austerity that he became a brahmarshi. With his wives, he wished
to cross the Shatashringa and reach heaven. With his wives, he was about to start on a northward direction.

'The ascetics told him, "As we went northwards, climbing the king of the mountains, we have seen inaccessible
regions on the mountain, the playgrounds of the gods, gandharvas and apsaras, Kubera's garden, laid out on plain
and uneven ground, the sloping banks of great rivers and impenetrable caverns in mountains. There are regions
that are always covered with snow and without trees, animals and birds. Some large tracts are inaccessible. No bird
can cross them, not to speak of animals. The only thing that can go there is air, siddhas and supreme rishis. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! How can these princesses cross that king of the mountains? Do not make them sink in
that misery and do not go there." Pandu replied, "O illustrious ones! It is said that one without a son has no door to
heaven. I have no son and I tell you that I am in great sorrow. According to dharma, men are born on this earth
with four debts-to ancestors, gods, rishis and men. The man who does not discharge them at the right time has no
worlds. This has been established by those who know dharma. The gods are pleased through sacrifices, the sages
through studying and austerities, the ancestors through sons and shraddhas and men through kindness. According
to dharma, I have discharged my debts towards rishis, gods and other men. O ones blessed with the power of austerities! I have not yet been freed from the debt towards my ancestors and I am troubled. It is certain that when my
body perishes, so will the ancestors. The best of men are born so as to give birth to offspring. I was begotten by the
great-souled one[Krishna Dvaipayana.] in my father's field. Like that, should I have offspring in my father's field?" The ascetics
replied, "O king! O one who is devoted to dharma! We know that there are offspring for you, learned, beautiful,
unblemished, and like the gods themselves. We have seen this through our divine sight. O tiger among men!
Through your acts, accomplish what the gods have destined for you. The thinking and intelligent man always obtains fruit that are not spoilt. O son! The fruit can be seen. Exert yourself. When you have obtained offspring with
all the qualities, you will find happiness." Having heard these words of the ascetics, Pandu was worried. He remembered that his own procreative powers had been lost thanks to the deer's curse.

'He told the famous Kunti, his lawful wife, "A union to obtain offspring is supported. O Kunti! The sacred texts
say that the worlds are established by offspring. The learned ones who know eternal dharma say this. Offerings,
gifts, austerities, self-control-it is said that none of these free a childless man from his sins. O one with the sweet
smiles! Knowing this, since I am without offspring, I think and can see that I will never attain the bright worlds. O
timid one! Since I was addicted to cruelty and viciousness, through the deer's curse, I lost my powers of procreation before my desire was satisfied. O Pritha! The religious texts speak of six kinds of sons who are both heirs and
relatives and six kinds of sons who are neither heirs, nor relatives. Listen-the son born from one's own self, the
son presented, the son purchased, the son born from one's widow, the son born through one's wife before marriage
and the son born through a loose wife[These are both heirs and relatives.]. The others are the son gifted, the son bought, the son who is obtained
artificially, the son who comes on his own, the son who comes with marriage, the son who is born of unknown semen and the son who is born from an inferior womb[These are neither heirs, nor relatives. As listed, the number adds up to seven and not six. Nor are the differences very clear. For instance, purchased/bought or gifted/presented occur in both categories. In the first list, the
word for purchased is parikrita. In the second list, the word for purchased is krita. The text doesn't enable us to
deduce the difference and is this also the case with gifted/presented.]. One should try to obtain sons from the first downwards
and so on. One always desires to obtain a son from a better man. O Pritha! The self-created Manu has said that the
righteous who have no offspring can ensure the fruits of dharma outside their own semen. O famous one! Since I
am myself incapable of procreation, I will ask you to obtain sons through my equals or betters. O Kunti! Listen to
the story of Sharadandayani, the wife of a warrior. She was instructed by her superiors to obtain a son. O Kunti!
When her season came, she bathed. In the night, she went to a place where four roads met and welcomed an accomplished Brahmana. For the sake of obtaining a son, she poured oblations into the fire. After performing this
rite, she lived with him and three maharatha sons were thus born, Durjaya being the eldest. O fortunate one! On
my instructions, you should also quickly obtain a son through a Brahmana who is superior to me in austerities."'
