'Brihadashva said, "Like a bird travelling in the sky, he swiftly crossed rivers, mountains, forests and lakes. As the
chariot travelled, King Bhangasvari, the conqueror of enemy cities, saw that his upper garment had fallen down.
When he saw that the garment had dropped as they were speeding, the great-souled king told Nala, 'I will go and
get it. O immensely intelligent one! Restrain these immensely swift horses. Varshneya can then go and retrieve the
garment.' Nala replied, 'Your garment fell down far behind. We have travelled more than a yojana since then. It is
not possible to get it back now.' O king! While he was thus addressed by Nala, King Bhangasvari came to a forest
where there was a vibhitaka tree laden with fruit.

'"On seeing the tree, the king immediately told Bahuka, 'O suta! Now witness my great prowess at counting.
Everyone does not know everything. Indeed, there is no one who knows everything. O Bahuka! In this tree, the
number of leaves and fruits that are still on it is more than those that have fallen down by one hundred and one. O
Bahuka! There is one more leaf and one hundred fruit. Those two branches have five crore leaves. Take those two
branches and their twigs. The fruits there will number two thousand and ninety-five.' At that, Bahuka descended
from the chariot and told the king, 'O king! O oppressor of enemies! You have stated something that is beyond my
perception. O king! If I count, nothing will be left to supposition. O great king! Witness as I count the number of
vibhitakas. I do not know whether your statement is right or wrong. O lord of men! You will see as I count the
number of fruit. Let Varshneya handle the reins of the horses for the moment.' The king told the suta[Bahuka.], 'We do
not have any time to delay.' However, Bahuka told him with great humility, 'Wait for only an instant. Or if you
wish to hurry, take Varshneya as your charioteer. From here onwards, the road is smooth.' O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! Rituparana comforted him and said, 'O Bahuka! There is no one on earth who is your equal as a
charioteer. You know about horses. I desired to go to Vidarbha with your help. I seek a favour with you. Please do
not create obstacles. O Bahuka! I will do whatever you wish, and whatever you tell me, if you take me to Vidarbha
today and show me the sunrise there.' At that, Bahuka told him, 'I will count the vibhitakas and then go to Vidarbha. Please do what I ask you to.' Unwillingly, the king asked him to proceed with the counting. He dismounted
from the chariot and swiftly cut down the tree. He was extremely surprised that, on counting, the number of fruits
was exactly what the king had told him it would be. He said, 'O king! This is extraordinary and I have seen your
powers. O king! I wish to know the learning through which you have known this.' But the king was in a hurry to
leave and replied, 'Know that I am versed with the heart of the dice and have expertise in counting.' Bahuka said,
'O bull among men! Give me that knowledge. And take from me the knowledge about handling horses.' King Rituparna desired to imbibe the knowledge about horses and there was also the urgency of his task[Of reaching Vidarbha in time.]. So he told
Bahuka, 'Let it be that way. Accept from me the supreme knowledge about the heart of the dice. O Bahuka! But let
my knowledge about horses remain in your heart as a trust.' Having said this, Rituparna gave his knowledge to
Nala.

'"When Nala had learned the knowledge of the dice, Kali emerged from his body, continuously vomiting from
his mouth Karkotaka's virulent venom. The fire of Kali's curse, which had made the king thin and had oppressed
him for a long time, making him lose control over his own self, also issued out. Kali's self was freed from the poison and he assumed his own form. Nala, lord of the nishadhas, was angry and wished to curse him. Kali was
frightened. He trembled and joined his hands in salutation. He said, 'O king! Control your anger. I will give you
supreme fame. In anger, Indrasena's mother[Meaning Damayanti.] had cursed me earlier, when you had abandoned her and I have
been sorely oppressed since then. O Indra among kings! O invincible one! I have lived inside you in great misery. I
have burnt day and night from the venom of the king of the serpents. If anyone from the world of men recounts
your deeds incessantly, he shall have no reason to be scared of danger from me.' On hearing these words, King
Nala controlled the wrath in his soul. Then the frightened Kali quickly entered the vibhitaka. When Kali had been
conversing with Nishadha, he had been invisible to others.

'"King Nishadha, the destroyer of enemy warriors, was cured of his fever. Kali had been destroyed and the king
had counted the number of fruit. He was extremely delighted and was again endowed with his earlier radiance.
Then the energetic one ascended the chariot and drove the swift steeds. Having been possessed by Kali, the vibhitaka has come to acquire a bad reputation. Nala's heart was delighted. He repeatedly urged those supreme horses
and they travelled like birds. The great-minded king proceeded in the direction of Vidarbha. When Nala had gone a
long distance, Kali also returned home. O lord of the earth! King Nala was freed from his fever. O king! But
though he was free of Kali, he was still separated from his old form."'
