'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Drupada's sons, Kuntibhoja's sons and thousands of rakshasas had been killed by
Drona's son, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna and Yuyudhana united and made up their minds
to fight. On beholding Satyaki in that battle, Somadatta again became angry and enveloped him in every direction
with a great shower of arrows. There was an extremely terrible battle between those on your side and the enemy
and it increased fear. It was fierce and was fought by those who desired victory. For the sake of Satvata, Bhima
pierced Kourava Somadatta with ten arrows and the brave one pierced him back with one hundred. The aged
one[Somadatta.] possessed all the qualities, like Yayati, the son of Nahusha. On account of his son, he was overcome with
grief. Satvata angrily pierced him with ten sharp arrows that possessed the force of the vajra. Having struck him
with great power, he again pierced him with seven arrows. For Satvata's sake, Bhimasena hurled a new, firm and
terrible club towards Somadatta's head. In that battle, Satyaki angrily shot a supreme arrow towards Somadatta's
chest. It was like the fire to the touch and was well tufted. The terrible club and the arrow simultaneously descended on the body of the ratha and maharatha Somadatta fell down. On seeing that his son[Somadatta was Bahlika's son and Bahlika was Pratipa's son.] was unconscious, Bahlika attacked and released a shower of arrows, like a cloud that pours at the right time. For the sake of Satvata, in the
forefront of that battle, Bhima afflicted and pierced the great-souled Bahlika with nine arrows. Pratipa's son was
enraged. The mighty-armed one struck Bhima on the chest with a lance, like Purandara hurling the vajra. Having
been struck by it, Bhima trembled and lost his senses. Having recovered his senses, the powerful one hurled an
iron club. Thus struck by Pandava, Bahlika's head was severed. He was killed and fell down on the ground, like a
king of mountains shattered by thunder.

'"On seeing that the brave Bahlika, bull among men, had been killed, ten of your sons, who were like
Dasharatha's sons[In valour. Dasharatha's son is Rama.], attacked Bhima. Bhima killed your sons with ten iron arrows. He then countered Karna's
beloved son, Vrishasena. At this, Karna's famous brother, Vrisharatha, struck Bhima with iron arrows and was
killed by that powerful one. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhima then used iron arrows to kill seven brave
rathas and uprooted your brother-in-law, Shatachandra. Unable to tolerate the death of maharatha Shatachandra,
Shakuni's brave brothers, Gajaksha, Sharabha and Vibhu, attacked Bhimasena and struck him with sharp arrows.
They afflicted him and poured down a shower of powerful iron arrows. But he killed those five extremely powerful
rathas with five arrows[The Critical edition excises a shloka. Consequently, only three of Shakuni's brothers are named, Gajaksha,
Sharabha and Vibhu. With the missing shloka included, we have the other two names, Subhaga and Bhanudatta.]. On seeing that those brave ones had been killed, the best of kings began to tremble.

'"O unblemished one! While the one who had been born in a pot[Drona.] and your sons looked on, Yudhishthira angrily destroyed your soldiers. In that battle, Yudhishthira dispatched the Ambashthas, Malavas, brave Trigartas,
Shibis and large numbers of others to the world of the dead. The king cut down the Abhishahas, Shurasenas,
Bahlikas and Vasatikas and caused the earth to be covered with a mire of blood. O king! In that battle that involved
many people, Yudhishthira used his arrows to send brave warriors from Madraka to the land of the dead. In the direction of Yudhishthira's chariot, a tumultuous sound arose. 'Kill. Seize. Capture. Pierce. Slice down.' On seeing
that your soldiers were being driven away by Yudhishthira, Drona was urged by your son and countered him with
his arrows. Drona was extremely angry and unleashed the vayavya weapon at the king. But he[Yudhishthira.] destroyed that
divine weapon with another weapon. When that weapon was destroyed by Yudhishthira, Bharadvaja's son hurled
varuna, yamya, agneya, tvashtra and savitra weapons[Divine weapons, respectively named after Varuna, the Ashvins (yamas), Agni, Tvashtra and Savita.]. He was extremely enraged and wished to kill the descendant of the Pandu lineage. However, the mighty-armed one, who knew about dharma, was not frightened. He
used his weapons to destroy all the weapons that had been hurled by the one who had been born in a pot. The one
who had been born in a pot wished to fulfil the pledge that he had made[To Duryodhana, about seizing Yudhishthira.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
He released the aindra and prajapatya weapons[Divine weapons named after Indra and Prajapati.]. He wished to kill the son of dharma and was devoted to ensuring your son's welfare. The lord of the Kurus[Yudhishthira.] possessed the gait of an elephant and a lion. He was broad in
the chest and his eyes were large and red. His energy was not inferior[To Drona's.]. He invoked the mahendra weapon[Named after Mahendra, the great Indra.]
and destroyed those weapons. On seeing that his weapons had been destroyed, Drona was overcome with anger.
Wishing to destroy Yudhishthira, he unleashed the brahma weapon[Named after Brahma, also referred to as brahmastra.]. Everything was covered in darkness and
we could see nothing. O lord of the earth! All the beings were full of great terror. O Indra among kings! On seeing
that a brahmastra had been invoked, Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, used a brahmastra to counter it. At this, all the foremost of warriors praised those bulls among men. The great archers, Drona and Partha, were skilled in all forms of
fighting.

'"Drona abandoned Kounteya and attacked Drupada's soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His eyes
were coppery red in anger and he destroyed them with the vayavya weapon. Slaughtered by Drona, the Panchalas
fled, while Bhimasena and the great-souled Partha[Arjuna.] were looking. Kiriti and Bhima used their power to make
them return. They attacked your army with two large arrays of chariots. Bibhatsu was on the right and Vrikodara
was on the left flank. They showered down a great torrent of arrows on Bharadvaja's son. O great king! The Srinjayas, the immensely energetic Panchalas and the Matsyas and Satvatas followed them. The army of the Bharatas
was then slaughtered by Kiriti. O great king! Drona and your own son[Duryodhana.] tried to counter them. But they were incapable of countering those warriors."'
