Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Vedas praise dharma, artha and kama. But which
gain is special? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about what Kundadhara had affectionately done for someone who had done him a good turn earlier. There was a brahmana who did not possess any riches.
But he desired to pursue dharma and use the wealth for the purpose of conducting sacrifices. He tormented himself
through fierce austerities. Having made up his mind, he worshipped the gods. But though he worshipped the gods
with devotion, he failed to obtain riches. He then began to think, 'Which is the god who has not so far been worshipped by men, who can be speedily pleased?' He then saw a follower of the gods, Kundadhara, standing near
him, with a tranquil form that was in the form of the cloud. On seeing that great-souled one, devotion was generated in him. 'This one, with a body like this, will bring prosperity for me. He lives near the gods and has not been
worshipped by men earlier. He will quickly grant me a lot of riches.' The brahmana then used incense, fragrances,
superior garlands and many kinds of offerings to worship him. The cloud was pleased within a short period of
time. Wishing to benefit him, he spoke these words to the one who had controlled himself. 'The virtuous ones have
decreed methods of salvation for those who kill brahmanas, those who are drunkards, those who are thieves and
those who have broken their vows. But there is no salvation for those who are ungrateful. Desire has a son named
adharma. Anger is said to be the son of jealousy. Greed is the son of deceit. But ungratefulness has no offspring.'

The brahmana lay down on a bed of kusha grass. Kundadhara's energy penetrated him and he saw all the beings in
a dream. He was tranquil and he had cleansed himself with austerities and devotion. The brahmana's atman was
pure and in the night, he saw these signs. O Yudhishthira! He saw the immensely radiant and great-souled Manibhadra standing amongst the gods, issuing instructions. The gods were granting kingdoms and riches to those who
performed good deeds and were taking them away in the case of bad deeds. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In
the midst of the yakshas, he saw Kundadhara prostrate himself on the ground before the gods. Instructed by the
words of the gods, the immensely illustrious Manibhadra asked, 'Why is Kundadhara prostrate on the ground?
What does he want?"

'"Kundadhara said, 'That brahmana is devoted to me. If the gods are pleased with me, I desire that favours
should be shown to him, so that he can obtain happiness.'"

'Bhishma said, "Instructed by the words of the gods, Manibhadra again spoke these words to the immensely radiant Kundadhara. 'O fortunate one! Arise. You have been successful. Be happy. Whatever riches are desired by
this brahmana, your friend, on the instructions of the gods, I will give those riches to him, because of your friendship with him.' But Kundadhara thought that the sentiments of men were certainly fickle. Therefore, the illustrious
one thought that he should turn the brahmana's mind towards austerities.

'"Kundadhara said, 'O granter of riches! I am not seeking riches for the brahmana. For this devotee, I desire that
you should act so as to show him another favour. For this devotee, I do not desire the earth, full of riches, or a great
store of wealth. Instead, let him follow dharma. Let him find delight in dharma. Let his intelligence be such that he
earns a living through dharma. Let dharma be the most important thing for him. It is my view that this should be
the favour shown.'

'"Manibhadra replied, 'The fruits of dharma are many kinds of kingdoms and happiness. Let him enjoy those
fruits and let him be free of all physical hardships.'"

'Bhishma said, "However, the immensely illustrious Kundadhara repeatedly entreated that he should only be
driven to practise dharma. At this, the gods were satisfied.

'"Manibhadra replied, 'The gods are pleased with you and with this brahmana. He will have dharma in his soul
and his mind will turn towards dharma.'"

'Bhishma said, "O Yudhishthira! The cloud was delighted at having been successful. He had obtained the boon
that he desired in his mind, one that was extremely difficult to get. The supreme among brahmanas saw that many
fine pieces of cloth were scattered around near him. But he was indifferent towards them.

'"The brahmana said, 'Since he has not paid any attention to my good deeds, no one else will[Kundadhara has not rewarded the brahmana's good deeds by asking for riches for him. However, the brahmana
has also expressed indifference towards the fine garments.]. I will therefore
go to the forest and live a life of supreme dharma.'"

'Bhishma said, "The supreme among brahmanas was indifferent and the gods had also shown him their favours.
He entered the forest and started great austerities. The brahmana subsisted on whatever fruits and roots were left
after serving the gods and the guests. O great king! There was great love in his mind for dharma. The brahmana
then discarded all roots and fruits and subsisted only on leaves. The supreme among brahmanas gave up leaves and
subsisted on  water. Thereafter,  he  subsisted  for  a  large  number  of  years  on  air  alone.  Despite  this,  it  was  extraordinary that the breath of his life did not fade. He was faithful towards dharma and performed fierce austerities.
After a long period of time, he obtained divine sight. He thought, 'If I am pleased with someone and my mind
turns towards giving him great riches, my words will never be false[Because of the powers he obtained through his austerities.].' Cheerfully, he continued with more austerities. Having been successful, he again thought about what would come next. 'If I am satisfied with someone and
wish to grant him a kingdom, he will become a king and my words will not be false.' O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! At this, Kundadhara showed himself before him, both because of his friendship and because the brahmana
had been successful in his yoga of austerities. O king! The brahmana was surprised to see Kundadhara, but met
him and honoured him according to the prescribed rites. Kundadhara said, 'O brahmana! Use  your  divine and
supreme sight to see the ends that kings come to and also use your sight to look at the worlds.' With his divine
sight, the brahmana could see a long distance away and saw that thousands of kings were submerged in hell.

'"Kundadhara said, 'If after worshipping me faithfully you had only obtained misery, what would I have given
you and how would I have shown you favours[Had Kundadhara only wanted riches for the brahmana.]? Look and look again at what happens to the desire that men possess. In particular, the gate of heaven is barred to men.'"

'Bhishma said, "He saw[The brahmana saw.] men stationed there, enveloped in desire, anger, greed, fear, intoxication, sleep, laziness and procrastination.

'"Kundadhara said, 'People are bound by these. Gods are frightened of men because they always act contrary to
the words of the gods, in every way. Without the permission of the gods, no one can follow dharma. Through the
strength of austerities, you can bestow kingdoms and riches.'"

'Bhishma said, "At this, the brahmana bowed his head down before that store of water. The great-souled one
said, 'You have shown me a great favour. Earlier, I was bound down by desire and avarice and did not realize your
affection for me. Therefore, you should pardon me.' Kundadhara told the bull among brahmanas, 'I have forgiven
you.' He embraced him with his arms and disappeared from there. In ancient time, thus did the brahmana roam
through all the worlds, having been united with austerities through Kundadhara's favours. Through the strength of
dharma and yoga, one attains the supreme objective. One can roam around as one wishes and obtain success in all
one's desires. A person who follows dharma is worshipped by gods, brahmanas, virtuous people, yakshas, men and
charanas[Celestial singers.]. But this is not true of those who desire riches and other things. If a person's mind is such that loves
dharma and practises it, the gods are extremely pleased with him. The happiness obtained through riches lasts for a
short time. Dharma brings supreme happiness."'
