'Sanjaya said, "O king! When that terrible destruction of brave ones was going on, the illustrious Shakuni Soubala
attacked the Pandavas. O king! Hardikya Satvata[Kritavarma.], the destroyer of enemy heroes, attacked the army of the Pandavas in that encounter. Pandava's brave powerful son, the scorcher of enemies, attacked your soldiers in a cheerful frame of mind. He possessed the foremost of speedy horses, the best of those from Kamboja and from the land
of the rivers, those from Aratta, Mahi, Sindhu, white ones from Vanayu and others from mountainous regions.
There were other swift ones of the Tittira breed, as fleet as the wind. They were armoured and ornamented in gold.
They were trained well. This brave son of Arjuna was named Iravat. He was born from the intelligent Partha and
was the son of the daughter of the king of the nagas. When her husband was slain by Suparna[Garuda.], she was distressed and depressed in her mind. She was also childless and was bestowed by the great-souled Airavata[Bestowed on Arjuna. Her father Kouravya was the king of the nagas and was descended from Airavata. Thus,
Kouravya can also be referred to as Airavata. The story has been recounted in Section 16 (Volume 2).]. She
was overcome by the pangs of desire and Partha accepted her as his wife. Thus it was that Arjuna's son was born
in another one's field[Meaning another person's wife.]. Protected by his mother, he grew up in the world of the nagas. Because of his hatred for
Partha, his evil-souled uncle abandoned him[This is left dangling It is probably a reference to the naga Takshaka, who bore an animosity towards Arjuna because of the destruction of nagas in Khandava.]. He was handsome and brave and possessed all the qualities. Truth
was his valour. He quickly went to Indra's world when he heard that Arjuna had gone there. The one for whom
truth was his valour, went to his great-souled father. He anxiously bowed before him. Joining his hands in salutation, he humbly said, 'O fortunate one! O lord! I am Iravat. I am your son.' He told Pandava everything and reminded him of the circumstances about how he had met with his mother. He embraced his son, who was exactly
like him in all the qualities. In the abode of the king of the gods, Partha was delighted. O king! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The mighty-armed Arjuna then commanded him in the world of the gods and affectionately told
him about his duty. 'Come to us when it is the time for war.' O lord! He agreed and went away. In accordance with
those words, he presented himself, since the time for battle has come. O king! He was surrounded by many swift
horses, with all the complexions that one desires. Those horses bore golden harnesses and were of many hues.
They were as swift as thought. O king! They suddenly arrived and were like swans in the great ocean. They attacked the large numbers of your horses, which were also exceedingly fast. They struck each other on the chests
and on the noses. O king! Those extremely swift horses suddenly fell down on the ground. Those masses of horses
clashed against each other and were shattered and fell down. An extremely terrible sound was heard, like that
when Suparna descends. O great king! Thus it was that they clashed against each other in the battle. The horse-riders fiercely began to kill each other. A tumultuous and fearful encounter raged. On both sides, large numbers of
horses dashed around in all directions. The brave ones were mutilated with arrows. The horses were slain. They
were overcome with exhaustion. They began to diminish in number, destroying each other with their swords.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the armies of horses were whittled away and only a few were left,
Soubala's brave younger brothers rode out in the forefront of that battle. They were astride supreme horses that
were like the touch of the wind in their speed. They were as fleet as the wind. They were well-trained and not too
old or young. Those six were powerful-Gaja, Gavaksha, Vrishaka, Charmavat, Arjava and Shuka[The names of Shakuni's six brothers. Their father was Subala.]. They advanced with a great army and were supported by Shakuni and their own extremely strong warriors. They were armoured and skilled in battle. They were terrible in form and extremely strong. O mighty-armed one! With that extremely large army, desiring heaven and victory, they penetrated that supremely invincible army[Referring to Iravat's army.]. Unassailable
in battle, those from Gandhara cheerfully entered there. On seeing that they had cheerfully penetrated, the valiant
Iravat spoke to his own warriors, who were adorned with colourful ornaments and weapons in that battle. 'Act according to the decreed policy, so that all the warriors of the sons of Dhritarashtra can be killed in this battle, together with their followers and their mounts.' Agreeing, all of Iravat's warriors began to slay the ranks of the enemy,
though the enemy was invincible in battle. On witnessing that their ranks were being brought down in that battle,
all of Subala's sons could not tolerate this state of affairs in the encounter. All of them attacked and surrounded Ira-
vat. They incited each other to attack him with sharp lances. The brave ones dashed around and created a great
melee. The great-souled Iravat was pierced by those sharp lances. Blood began to flow from his body and he
looked like an elephant wounded by a goad. He was severely wounded on his chest, his back and his sides. O king!
He was alone and faced many. But he was not distressed and did not lose his fortitude. Iravat was enraged in that
battle. The destroyer of enemy cities confounded all of them by piercing them with sharp arrows. The scorcher of
enemies uprooted all the lances from his own body and used them to strike Subala's sons in that battle. He unsheathed a sharp sword and grasped a shield. He swiftly advanced on foot, wishing to kill Subala's sons in that encounter. Having regained their senses, all of Subala's sons became angry and advanced against Iravat. But displaying the dexterity of his hands with the sword and proud of his strength, Iravat attacked all those sons of Subala. He
roamed around with such great speed, that Subala's sons, though they were on fleet horses, could not find an opportunity to strike him. However, in that battle, seeing him stationed on the ground again, all of them surrounded
him at close quarters, wishing to capture him. The destroyer of enemies saw that they were near him. He used his
sword to slice off their right hands and their left and mutiliated other parts of their bodies. All their arms were
adorned with various ornaments. They were seen to fall down. They too, without their limbs, fell down on the
ground, devoid of their lives. O great king! In that extremely terrible battle where brave warriors were slaughtered,
only Vrishaka escaped, though he was severely wounded[Vrishaka was the only one of Subala's sons who survived.].

'"On seeing that all of them had fallen down, Duryodhana was frightened. He spoke to the extremely terrible
rakshasa who was terrible in form. The scorcher of enemies was a great archer and was skilled in maya. He was
the son of Rishyashringa[Rishyashringa was a famous sage.]. He had earlier become an enemy of Bhimasena on account of the slaying of
Baka[Bhima had killed a rakshasa named Baka.]. 'O brave one! Witness the strength of Phalguna's son. He is skilled in maya and has caused the unpleasant and terrible destruction of my forces. O son[The word used is tata.]! You are capable of going anywhere at will. You are skilled in
the use of weapons of maya. You are the sworn enemy of Partha. Therefore, kill him in battle.' The rakshasa, terrible in form, agreed to these words. He roared like a lion and advanced to where Arjuna's young son was. He was
surrounded by his own soldiers, who were brave and armed. They were accomplished in fighting, were astride
mounts and were armed with polished lances. He wished to kill the immensely powerful Iravat in battle. The
valiant and swift Iravat was enraged. The slayer of enemies countered the rakshasa who was seeking his death. On
seeing that he was descending on him, the extremely powerful rakshasa swiftly resorted to his powers of maya. He
created a large number of illusory horses. They were ridden by terrible rakshasas, who wielded spears and javelins.
Two thousand of these armed ones angrily advanced. The two sides clashed and quickly sent each other to the land
of the dead. When the soldiers on both sides had been killed, the two of them, invincible in battle, attacked each
other in that encounter, like Vritra against Vasava. On seeing the rakshasa, invincible in battle, advance against
him, the extremely strong Iravat was enraged and attacked him. When the evil-minded one approached close, he
used his sword to slice off his blazing sword and shattered his shield into five parts. On seeing that the bow had
been severed, he quickly resorted to the sky and angrily confounded Iravat with his maya. But Iravat also rose up
into the sky and confounded the rakshasa with his own maya. He was invincible too and could assume any form at
will. He knew about the body's inner organs and pierced his body with his arrows. O great king! The foremost
among rakshasas was repeatedly wounded through these arrows, but he became hale again and regained his youth.
Maya is natural to them, and according to their wishes, so are energy, age and beauty. Thus, though the rakshasa's
limbs were repeatedly mangled, they healed. Iravat used his sharp battle axe to repeatedly slice angrily at the immensely strong rakshasa. That brave and powerful rakshasa was repeatedly sliced like a tree and roared terribly,
making a tumultuous sound. Wounded by the battleaxe, the rakshasa began to profusely shed blood. The powerful
one became enraged and continued to battle forcefully. On seeing that the enemy was so energetic in the battle,
Rishyashringa's son assumed an extremely terrible and gigantic form. While everyone looked on, he tried to grasp
him in the forefront of that battle. But seeing this maya employed by the great-souled rakshasa, Iravat angrily created his own maya. He was overcome by anger and he was one who never retreated from battle. O king! His mother's relatives approached him and he was surrounded by many nagas in that battle, assuming a great form like
Bhogavat[Bhogavati is the capital of the nagas and Bhogavat can mean any of the serpents residing there. But it is probably a reference to Ananta.]. The rakshasa was enveloped by many kinds of nagas. Enveloped by those nagas, that bull among
rakshasas thought and assumed the form of Suparna[Garuda.], so that he could devour the nagas. On seeing that his
mother's relatives were devoured through maya, Iravat was confused. And the rakshasa killed him with his sword.
Iravat's head was adorned with earrings and a diadem and was as radiant as a lotus or the moon. The rakshasa
made it fall down on the ground.

'"On seeing that Arjuna's brave son had been slain by the rakshasa, the sons of Dhritarashtra, together with the
kings, became free from sorrow. The great and terrible battle commenced again. The armies attacked each other
and the carnage was great and terrible. Horses, elephants and infantry became mixed with each other and were
killed by tuskers. Chariot-riders and elephants were also killed by foot soldiers. O king! Rathas, on your side and
on theirs, killed masses of infantry and chariot-riders and many horses in that encounter. Arjuna did not know that
his son had been killed and in that battle, slew many kings who were protecting Bhishma. O king! The immensely
strong ones, on your side and on that of the Srinjayas, fought each other in that battle, offering their lives as obla-
tions. Their hair was dishevelled. They were without armour. They were without chariots and their bows had been
severed. But they confronted each other and fought with their bare arms. The immensely strong Bhishma killed
many maharathas with arrows that penetrated the innards and made the soldiers of the Pandavas tremble. He killed
many men in Yudhishthira's army, and many elephants, horse-riders, chariot-riders and horses. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! On witnessing Bhishma's valour in that battle, we thought that it was as extraordinary as Shakra's
valour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhimasena and Parshata were also like that. The battle fought by the
Satvata archer[Satyaki.] was also terrible. On witnessing Drona's valour, the Pandavas were overcome by fear. They
thought that he was alone capable of killing all the soldiers in battle, not to speak of a situation where he was surrounded by warriors whose bravery was famous on earth. O great king! Oppressed by Drona in that battle, they
spoke in this fashion. O bull among the Bharata lineage! While that terrible encounter continued between the two
armies, the brave ones did not pardon each other. Those immensely strong ones were engrossed in that battle, as if
they were overcome by rakshasas and demons. The archers on your side, and those of the Pandaveyas, were enraged. We did not see anyone seeking to protect his life. O lord of men! It was a battle like that of warriors from
among the daityas themselves."'
