Vaishampayana said, 'O protector of the earth! Then those heroes, with the others[Their companions and servants.], lived here and there, and
eventually arrived at the Naimisha forest. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas performed
their ablutions at the sacred tirtha of Gomati and donated cattle and riches. The Kouravas repeatedly satisfied the
gods, the ancestors and the brahmanas at Kanya tirtha, Ashva tirtha[Tirtha of horses.] and Gava tirtha[Tirtha of cows.]. O lord of the earth!
After staying in Valakoti on Mount Vrishaprastha, all the Pandavas bathed in Bahuda. O lord of the earth! They offered sacrifices to the gods in Prayaga, the sacrificial ground of the gods. Devoted to the truth, they cleaned their
bodies and performed supreme austerities at the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna. Having been cleansed
of sin, those great-souled ones gave a lot of riches to brahmanas. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with the brahmanas, those sons of Pandu then went to Prajapati's[Brahma's.] altar, frequented by ascetics. The brave
ones lived there, performing supreme austerities. They always satisfied the brahmanas with offerings obtained
from the forest. They then went to Mahidhara, worshipped by rajarshi Gaya, unrivalled in radiance, learned in
dharma and the performer of pure deeds. The lake Gayashira is there and the sacred Mahanadi. The extremely sacred and supreme Brahmasara[Brahma's lake.] is there, frequented by rishis. There the illustrious Agastya went to
Vaivasvata[Vaivasvata is the son of Vivasvata or the sun-god and is one of Yama's names. Dharma also means Yama.]. O king! That is where eternal Dharma himself lived. O lord of the earth! All the rivers originate
from there. That is where Mahadeva, the wielder of the pinaka, is always present[The wielder of the pinaka is Mahadeva. Pinaka means both a bow and a trident.]. The great Akshayavata is
there and the Pandavas performed chaturmasya[A sacrifice performed once every four (chatur) months (masa) and performed at the beginnings of the
months of Kartika, Phalguna and Ashadha.] and the great sacrifice of the rishis there. Hundreds of brahmanas, rich in austerities, came there and performed the chaturmasya sacrifice in accordance with the rites laid
down by the rishis. The learned brahmanas, learned in the Vedas and always devoted to austerities, talked about
sacred accounts, while they were seated in the sacrificial ground of those great-souled ones.

'O king! There was a brahmana named Shamatha. He was learned and immersed in vows and celibate. He spoke
about Gaya, the son of Amurtarayas. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Speaking to Yudhishthira.]! Gaya, the son of Amurtarayas, is
supreme among rajarshis. Listen to me as I recount his virtuous deeds. O king! His sacrifice had a lot of food and a
lot of stipends. There were mountains of food, in hundreds and thousands. There were several hundred rivers of
ghee and curd. There were thousands of flows of rich condiments. O king! Day after day, they were given to those
who asked for them. The brahmanas ate special food that was cooked well. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
When the time came for distributing gifts, the sound of the brahman rose up to heaven. Nothing could be heard but
for the sound of the brahman. O king! The sacred sound travelled through the earth, the sky and the firmament and
filled them and it was extraordinary. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Satisfied with the pure food and drink, men
sung a verse that radiated in every region. 'Who is there among beings who still wishes to eat at Gaya's sacrifice?
There are still twenty-five mountains of food left. No men earlier, nor men hereafter, will do what the immensely
radiant rajarshi Gaya did at this sacrifice. The gods have been extremely satisfied by the offerings tendered by
Gaya. They will never be able to accept anything offered by others.' O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Many such
verses were sung at the sacrifice of the great-souled one, near the banks of the lake."'
