Janamejaya asked, 'They experienced great sorrow when their wife was abducted. What did the Pandavas do when
they obtained Krishna back?'

Vaishampayana said, 'They suffered supreme distress when Krishna was abducted. Together with his brothers,
the undecaying king[Yudhishthira.] left Kamyaka. Yudhishthira again went to beautiful Dvaitavana. They went towards
Markandeya's beautiful hermitage, where there were succulent roots and fruit. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the Pandavas began to reside there with Krishna, controlled in their vows and living frugally on a diet of
fruit. While Kunti's sons, King Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Arjuna and the two Pandavas who were Madri's sons
lived in Dvaitavana, those scorchers of enemies, with dharma in their souls, devoted to brahmanas and rigid in
their vows, experienced a great calamity that eventually ended in happiness. While Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira.] was seated with
his brothers in the forest, a brahmana swiftly approached and sorrowfully spoke these words to him. "I left my kindling and the churning rod[Used to light a fire through friction.] against a tree. But they stuck to the antlers of a deer that rubbed itself against it. O
king! The great deer rushed away at great speed from the hermitage, using giant leaps. O king! Swiftly follow the
footprints of that great deer. O Pandavas! Bring those back to me, so that my agnihotra is not spoilt." On hearing
the words of the brahmana, Yudhishthira felt sorry. Kounteya grasped his bow and left with his brothers. For the
sake of the brahmana, all those archers and bulls among men prepared themselves and swiftly dashed after the
deer. The Pandavas saw the deer at a short distance and hurled barbed arrows, hollow arrows and iron arrows at it.
But the maharathas could not pierce it. While they were trying in this way, the great deer disappeared. On seeing
the deer disappear, those intelligent ones were exhausted and sorry. In that dense forest, they sought shelter under
the cool shade of a banyan tree. Their limbs were sore with hunger and thirst and they seated themselves. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When they were seated, Nakula spoke to his eldest brother, with a heavy heart and
lack of patience. "Dharma has never been given up in our lineage. Nor have objectives been lost through laziness.
We are superior to all beings. O king! Why has this disaster befallen us again?"'
