Yajnavalkya said,  'I  have  already  spoken  to  you  about  the  knowledge  of  sankhya.  Now  hear  about  the
knowledge of yoga. O supreme among kings! This is the truth about what I have learnt and what I have
seen. There is no knowledge that is equal to sankhya. There is no strength that is equal to yoga. They prescribe
similar practices and both are said to lead to prosperity. However, men who possess limited intelligence perceive
them as distinct. O king! We see them as identical and have arrived at this determination. Whatever is seen through
yoga is exactly the same as whatever is seen through sankhya. A person who sees yoga and sankhya as identical
actually sees the truth. O scorcher of enemies! Know that restraining the breath[The text uses the word Rudra, a rare term for prana.] is the foremost and supreme aspect of yoga. Through this, they wander around in the ten directions in their bodies[Yogis roam around in their subtle bodies.]. O son! O unblemished one!
When the body is destroyed, one cheerfully abandons it and, in subtle form, uses the eight qualities of yoga[There are eight steps in yoga. But this probably refers to eight major siddhis or powers. These are anima (becoming as small as one desires), mahima (as large as one desires), laghima (as light as one wants), garima (as
heavy as one wants), prapti (obtaining what one wants), prakamya (travelling where one wants), vashitvam
(powers to control creatures) and ishitvam (obtaining divine powers).] to
roam around in the worlds. Those who are learned about yoga speak of these eight qualities. O supreme among
kings! They also speak about the eight other subtle qualities[This probably means the eight steps of asana, pranayama, yama, niyama, pratyahara, dhyana, dharana and
samadhi.]. The practice of yoga has been said to be excellent
and these are the two kinds of qualities that are practised in yoga. The sacred texts have given indications about
how this is to be done, with qualities and without qualities[Pranayama with qualities is when a mantra is simultaneously chanted, recommended for early stages. When a
mantra is no longer necessary, that is pranayama without qualities.]. O lord of the earth! Together with pranayama, there
has to be dharana in the mind. Pranayama can be with qualities. Without qualities, dharana occurs in the mind. O
supreme among those from Mithila! The breath of life is seen to be released. However, one should not act so as to
have an excess of the breath[The inhalation, holding and exhalation is for a prescribed period of time. This duration is gradually increased.
The purport seems to be that in the initial stages, this duration should not be excessively great.]. In the first quarter of the night, twelve principles of breathing have been prescribed. Having slept in the middle, in the last quarter of the night, there are another twelve principles of breathing.
One must practise these, self-controlled and satisfied with one's own self. One must turn one's intelligence towards
finding pleasure in one's own atman. There is no doubt that one must join oneself with the atman[Paramatman.]. The five taints
associated with the five senses-sound, touch, form, taste and scent-must be flung away. O lord of Mithila! One
must withdraw from thoughts of what can be obtained through action. All the objects of the senses must be immersed in the mind. O lord of men! The mind must be established in the consciousness, consciousness in intelligence and intelligence in prakriti. Having merged in this way, one must meditate on the absolute. He is radiant and
without blemish. He is eternal and infinite. He is pure and without decay. He is the purusha of sattva, beyond mortality and destruction. He is eternal and unmanifest. He is Ishana and the unmanifest Brahma. O great king! Listen
to the signs of someone who has been united in this fashion. The signs are of satisfaction, contentment and cheerful sleep. He is like a lamp ignited with oil, but burning in a place where there is no wind, with straight flames rising upwards. The learned speak of him in this way. He is like a rock that does not move, even when it has been
struck by the rain. He is incapable of being moved in any way. Those are the signs of a person who is united. The
sounds of conch shells, drums and many kinds of singing and the playing of musical instruments do not make him
tremble. These are the signs of a person who is united. It is like a man who climbs a flight of steps with a full vessel of oil in his hand, not spilling any, even if he is frightened. A person who has controlled his atman is like that,
not spilling a drop from the vessel, though scared. He ascends, single-minded. He calms his senses and is immobile. These are the signs of a sage who has been united in this way. Having been united in this way, he sees the
supreme and unmanifest Brahma, blazing, as if located in the midst of a great darkness. O great king! The eternal
sacred texts say that, after a long period of time, he is like a witness and abandons this body, advancing to the absolute. This is the yoga of yogis. What other signs can there be of yoga? Knowing this, the learned ones think
themselves to have been successful.'"'
