'Bhishma said, "O king! Thus addressed by the messenger, Drupada was like a thief who had been caught in the
act and could not utter a word. He made extreme efforts to pacify his in-law, through messengers who used sweet
words to argue this wasn't the case. But the king[Hiranyavarma.] again ascertained the truth of the matter, that the daughter of
Panchala was actually a maiden, and swiftly marched out. In accordance with the words of the nurses, he sent messengers to all his infinitely energetic friends about the deception that had been practised on his daughter. That
supreme among kings assembled an army. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He made up his mind to invade
Drupada. O Indra among kings! King Hiranyavarma consulted with his friends about what should be done vis-avis the king of Panchala. All the great-souled kings decided, 'O king! If it is true that Shikhandi is a woman, we
will bind the king of Panchala and take him home. We will instate another king as the king of Panchala. We will
kill King Drupada, together with Shikhandi.' Having learnt about their resolution, the lord of men[Hiranyavarma.] again sent his
kshatta[The word means the son of a shudra mother and a kshatriya father. It is applied for a steward or charioteer.] to Parshata with the words, 'Be steady. I am going to kill you.' King Drupada was timid by nature. In
addition, the lord of men was guilty. He was overcome by dreadful fright. After having sent the messenger from
Dasharna away, Drupada became extremely distressed. The lord of men, the king of Panchala, met his wife in private and spoke these words to Shikhandi's beloved mother. His heart was overcome by great fear and oppressed
with grief. 'My extremely powerful in-law is full of anger. King Hiranyavarma will attack me with an army. I am a
fool. What will I now do about our daughter? It is suspected that your son Shikhandi is actually a woman. Having
determined that this is the truth and thinking that he has been deceived, with his friends, his forces and his followers, he wishes to destroy me. O one with the beautiful hips! O lovely one! Tell me what is true and what is false. O
fortunate one! Having heard your words, I will act accordingly. I am in danger and so is the child Shikhandi. O
queen! O one with the fair complexion! You also confront a great hardship. I am asking you to tell me everything.
O one with the beautiful hips! O one with the beautiful smiles! Do not be frightened about Shikhandi. Knowing the
truth, I will make arrangements. O one with the beautiful thighs! I was myself deceived because of the lawful rites
that had been performed for a son. Thus I deceived the king of Dasharna, the lord of the earth. O immensely fortunate one! Tell me and I will act for our welfare.' The lord of men knew, but wished to establish his innocence before others[This part of the conversation was happening in public.]. Thus addressed, the queen replied to the lord of the earth in public."'
