'Dhritarashtra said, "Man is not the master of his destiny. He is like a wooden puppet dangling from a string. The
creator has made him subject to destiny. Therefore, continue to speak. I am patiently listening to your words."

'Vidura replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By speaking when it was not the right time, even Brihaspati's intelligence seems like ignorance and he is insulted. One is loved because of his gifts. Yet another is loved
because of his pleasant words. Yet another is loved because of his strength of mantras and roots[Roots used as medicines.]. But one who is
loved, is loved. One who is hated is not virtuous, or intelligent, or learned. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
All the pure deeds are ascribed to a loved one and all the evil ones to one who is hated. O great king! There is no
loss, if that loss brings on a gain. But that should be thought of as a loss, which having been gained, destroys much
more. Some are prosperous because of qualities, others because they possess riches. O Dhritarashtra! Avoid those
who are superior in riches, but are devoid of qualities."

'Dhritarashtra said, "All that you have said has been approved of by the wise and is for my welfare. But I cannot
abandon my son. Where there is dharma, there is victory."

'Vidura replied, "He who naturally possesses the qualities and is endowed with humility, will not ignore the
slightest bit of suffering that is caused to all beings. Those who malign others, are fond of unhappiness confronted
by others and seek to foment quarrels among others will always jump at such an opportunity. There is great sin in
accepting riches from, and great danger in giving riches to, those who have evil in their sight. There is extremely
great danger in dwelling with them. One should avoid association with those who are known to be wicked. One
should avoid men who possess similar and other great taints. When an association with a well-wisher comes to an
end, if one is inferior, one's affection is also destroyed, as are the fruits and happiness that derive from an association with a well-wisher. He[One who is low or inferior.] then seeks to malign and endeavours to bring about destruction. Even if the injury
was slight, because of his delusion, he cannot find any peace. One should not associate with such low and cruel
ones who have not been able to control their souls. A wise person will use his intelligence to examine this with
skill and maintain a distance. He who helps poor, miserable and diseased relatives, will obtain the prosperity of
sons and cattle and earn eternal fame. Those who desire their own welfare must help the relatives to prosper. O Indra among kings! Therefore, act virtuously, so that the lineage can be extended. O king! By acting well towards
your relatives, you will be united with prosperity. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Even if they do not possess
qualities, relatives must be protected. How can one refuse those who possess qualities and desire favours? O lord
of the earth! Be gracious towards the miserable Pandavas. O lord! Give them a few villages so that they can sustain
themselves. O lord of men! By doing this, you will obtain fame in this world. O father[The word used is tata.]! You are aged. Your sons
will be protected through this deed. What I speak is for your own welfare. Know that I am affectionate towards
you. O father[The word used is tata.]! One who wishes for welfare should not quarrel with relatives. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He should enjoy the happiness with his relatives. Eating together, conversing together, exhibiting affection towards
each other-this is what should be done among relatives. There should never be conflict. In this world, relatives
rescue and relatives make one sink. Those who follow good conduct, rescue. Those who follow evil conduct, make
one sink. O Indra among kings! O one who shows honour! Follow good conduct towards the Pandavas. Surrounded by them, you will become unassailable before your enemies. If a relative is oppressed, like a deer confronting
one with smeared hands[Meaning a hunter whose hands have been smeared with blood.], when he meets his prosperous relative, he takes on the other person's demerits[The prosperous relative's demerits are passed on to the relative who is oppressed.]. O best
among men! You will be tormented later on, when you hear that they or your sons have been slain. Reflect on this.
Do not perform a deed that will make you ascend your bed and be tormented. This life is uncertain. One should not
act in this way from the outset. It is not true that no man other than Bhargava strays[This is a reference to Parashurama, who was descended from Bhrigu. Parashurama killed his mother and also
destroyed the kshatriyas.]. But one who is intelligent
must consider the consequences of action. O lord of men! If Duryodhana committed an evil act earlier, as the elder
of the lineage, you must remedy it. Having established them in their stations, you will be freed from sins in this
world. O best of men! You will be revered by the learned ones. Wise ones have spoken about the fruits that bring
happiness. One should think about them and act accordingly. One will then obtain eternal fame.

'"Humility destroys bad conduct. Valour destroys adverse circumstances. Forgiveness always destroys anger.
Good conduct destroys evil omens. O king! A lineage should be judged in accordance with its servants, arenas of
action, abode, food and attire. He whose mind is inclined towards appropriate conduct, even in secret, and he who
is inclined towards wisdom-for these two, friendship is never destroyed. Like a well covered with grass, a
learned one must avoid those who are evil in intelligence and have no wisdom. Friendship with them is destroyed.
Nor should a wise one have friendship with one who is arrogant, stupid, fearsome, rash and a follower of adharma.
One should desire friendship with those who are grateful, followers of dharma, truthful, lacking in meanness, firm,
loyal, in control of their senses and established in that which one should be attached to. Withdrawal from the senses is more difficult than death. Serving them in excess brings destruction, even for the gods. The learned say that
mildness towards all beings, lack of jealousy, forgiveness, fortitude and respect for one's friends ensures a long
life. By resorting to his intelligence, an extremely firm man follows the conduct of supplanting an objective that
has been frustrated, with one that is better to follow. A man who is firm in his resolution about how to deal with
what will happen, and about the consequences of earlier deeds, is established in the present and his objectives are
not destroyed. One is always borne by what one follows in one's deeds, thoughts and speech. Therefore, one must
follow what ensures welfare. Undertaking what is auspicious, yoga, learning, resilience, truthfulness and constant
service to virtuous beings, ensure prosperity. Perseverance is the root of prosperity, destroying unhappiness and
bringing happiness. One who is like this attains greatness and supreme happiness. O father[The word used is tata.]! There is nothing
more glorious and more healing than an act of forgiveness by a powerful one, everywhere and at all times. A weak
person must forgive everything. A strong person must do that for the sake of dharma. If a person regards gain and
loss equally, forgiveness is always established in him. Follow happiness as long as it does not destroy dharma and
artha. But one should not follow kama, in accordance with the conduct of those who are foolish. There is no prosperity for those who are oppressed by unhappiness, those who are confounded, those who are atheists, those who
are lazy, those who are dishonest, those who are not self-controlled and those who are devoid of enterprise. An
honest man may be united with honesty and may be mild. Thinking that this shows a lack of strength, an evil-
minded one may oppress him. Because of this fear, prosperity does not approach a person who is extremely noble,
extremely generous, extremely valorous and extremely devoted to vows, just as those who are insolent about their
wisdom. The fruit of the Vedas is the agnihotra. The fruit of good conduct is learning. The fruits of wives are intercourse and sons. The fruits of riches are generosity in giving. One who earns riches through adharma and uses this
to perform deeds for the hereafter does not obtain those fruits after death, because those riches were obtained
through inappropriate means. One who has remnants left[Remnants of life.] should not be scared of wildernesses, forests, difficult
terrain, extreme hardships, delusions and upraised weapons. Resilience, self-control, dexterity, steadfastness, fortitude, learning and beginnings based on contemplation-know these to be the roots of success. Austerities are the
strength of ascetics. Knowledge of the brahman is the strength of those who wish to know the brahman. Violence
is the strength of those who are not virtuous. Forgiveness is the strength of those who possess qualities. These
eight do not cause obstructions to a rite-water, roots, fruits, milk, oblations, the pleasure of brahmanas, instructions of a preceptor and medicine. One should not do that to others which is injurious to one's own self. This is accumulated dharma. Everything else follows from desire. Anger should be conquered with lack of anger. Wickedness should be conquered with goodness. Miserliness should be conquered with generosity. Falsehood should be
conquered with truth. One should never trust women, deceitful ones, sloths, cowards, those who are terrible, men
who are insolent, thieves, those who are ingrates and atheists. There are four things that increase because of reverence, good conduct and constant servitude to superiors-fame, lifespan, renown and strength. Do not vainly set
your mind on success that can be obtained through excessive exertion, transgression of dharma or obeisance to enemies. One should sorrow over a man who is without learning. One should sorrow over a couple that has no offspring. One should sorrow over subjects who are hungry. One should sorrow over a kingdom that has no king.
Those who have bodies age through travels. Mountains age through rain. The lack of intercourse ages women.
Harsh words age the mind. The Vedas are tarnished if they are not recounted. Brahmanas are tarnished from lack
of vows. Curiosity tarnishes chaste women. Banishment from home tarnishes women. Silver tarnishes gold. Tin
tarnishes silver. Lead tarnishes tin. Dust tarnishes lead. Do not vanquish sleep with more sleep. Do not vanquish
women through desire. Do not conquer a fire by kindling it. Do not conquer thirst through liquor. One who conquers friends by giving, one who conquers enemies in battle and one who conquers wives through food and drink,
is successful in his life.

'"Those who have thousands live. Those who have hundreds also live. O Dhritarashtra! Give up this desire.
There is no other way to live. All the rice, barley, gold, animals and women on earth are not sufficient even for a
single man. On beholding all this, do not be deluded. O king! O king! I am again telling you that you will behave
well towards your sons if you treat them and the sons of Pandu equally."'
