'"Bhishma said, 'Then the illustrious god, the lord of all the lords of the world, replied to Brahma in a soft and
deep voice. "O son[The word used is tata.]! Through yoga, I have come to know everything that you desire. It will be as you wish."

Saying this, he instantly disappeared. At this, the gods, the rishis and the gandharvas were filled with great wonder.
All of them were filled with great curiosity and spoke to the grandfather. "O lord! Who was the one before whom
your illustrious self bowed down? You worshipped him using supreme praises. We desire to hear this." Thus addressed, the illustrious grandfather replied to all the gods, the brahmarshis and the gandharvas in soft and sweet
words. "He is the supreme Tat[Tat means that. Aum Tat Sat is an expression used in the context of the brahman. Aum stands for the brahman.
Tat means that. Sat means the absolute truth. Hence, Aum Tat Sat means the brahman is the absolute truth. One
should also mention the expression Tat Tvam Asi, an expression that features in the Upanishads. Tvam means
'you' and Asi means 'are'. Therefore, Tat Tvam Asi means that you are the brahman.]. He is the one who exists now and he is the one who will exist in the future. He
is the supreme one. He is the lord who is the soul of all beings. He is the brahman who is the supreme goal. O bulls
among gods! I had a conversation with that cheerful one. For the welfare of the universe, I sought the favours of
the lord of the universe. I requested him to be born in the world of men and to be known as Vasudeva. I asked him
to be born on earth for the death of the asuras. The immensely strong and terrible daityas, danavas and rakshasas,
who have been killed in the battle, have been born among men. It is for their death that the illustrious and mighty
one has been born in a human womb and is roaming around on earth, accompanied by Nara. The supreme rishis
Nara and Narayana are ancient. They are invincible in battle, even by the united immortals. Ignorant ones will not
know the rishis Nara and Narayana. Vasudeva is the great god of all the worlds and should be worshipped by you.
I, Brahma, the lord of the universe, am his offspring. O supreme among the gods! You should never disregard him
as a mere man. He is extremely valorous and holds the conch shell, the chakra and the club. He is the supreme
mystery. He is the supreme goal. He is the supreme brahman. He is the supreme glory. He is without decay. He is
the one who is not manifest. He is the eternal one. He is the supreme being whose praise is chanted as Purusha. But
no one knows him. He is supreme energy. He is supreme happiness. He is the supreme truth praised by Vishvakarma. The illustrious Vasudeva, whose valour is infinite, should not be disregarded as a mere man by all the gods and
Indra, or by all the worlds. The evil-minded one, who disregards and speaks of Hrishikesha as a mere man, is the
worst of men. The great-souled yogi has adopted a human form. He who disregards Vasudeva, is spoken of as one
who is immersed in darkness. That god is the soul of the mobile and the immobile. He is the immensely radiant
one who bears the srivatsa mark[Vishnu bears the srivatsa mark (or curl) on his chest. This is the place where Lakshmi resides.]. The lotus sprouted from his navel. He who does not know this is spoken of as
one who is immersed in darkness. He is diademed and wears the Koustubha jewel[Vishnu's jewel that emerged from the churning of the ocean.]. He is the one who dispels
the fear of his friends. He who disregards the great-souled one, will be immersed in terrible darkness. O supreme
among the gods! Having known the truth about Vasudeva, the lord of the lords of the worlds, all the worlds should
show him obeisance." Having spoken these words to the masses of gods in earlier times, the illustrious soul of all
the worlds returned to his own abode.

'"'The gods, the gandharvas, the sages and the apsaras listened to Brahma's chants, and happily returned to
heaven. O son[The word used is tata.]! In earlier times, the learned rishis spoke about Vasudeva in their assembly and I heard this. O
one who knows about the sacred texts! I also heard this from Rama, Jamadagni's son, the wise Markandeya, Vyasa
and Narada. Having heard the nature of the great-souled and illustrious Vasudeva, the lord of the lords of the
worlds and the undecaying one, from whom was created Brahma, the father of the universe, why should men not
worship and show obeisance to Vasudeva? O son! You have been restrained earlier by the sages, learned in the
Vedas, and been asked not to enter into a fight with the intelligent Vasudeva and also with the Pandavas. But because of your delusion, you did not understand. I think of you as a cruel rakshasa who is immersed in darkness.
That is the reason you hate Govinda and Pandava Dhananjaya. O king! I am telling you that he is eternal and undecaying. He is the eternal one who pervades all the worlds. He is the controller. He is the creator. He is the eternal
upholder. He holds up all the three worlds. He is the lord and the preceptor of the mobile and the immobile. He is
the warrior. He is victory. He is the victorious. He is the lord of all nature. O king! He is full of truth. He is devoid
of darkness and passion. Where there is Krishna, dharma exists there. Where there is dharma, victory exists there.
His greatness is yoga and yoga is his own self. O king! It is because the sons of Pandu hold this up that victory will
be theirs. He always provides beneficial counsel to the Pandavas. He always gives them strength in battle and protects them from fear. He is the eternal god. He is the auspicious one who is full of mystery. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! You have asked me about the one who is famous by the name of Vasudeva. Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras, each with their respective marks, always perform their own duties and serve the one
who should be worshipped. At the end of dvapara yuga and at the beginning of kali yuga, he is the one whom Sat-
vata Samkarshana eulogized in the appropriate way[However, at the time when this is being said, the present kali yuga has not yet started.]. All the worlds of gods and men, with the cities and right
up to the frontiers of the ocean, where men have lived for years and years, have been repeatedly created by Vasudeva.'"'
