Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing his words, the immensely radiant Bhishma, aged in wisdom, applauded him and
spoke these words, which were appropriate to the occasion. "It is fortunate that the Pandavas and their relatives are
well. It is fortunate that they have allies now and it is fortunate that they are devoted to dharma. It is fortunate that
those brothers, the descendants of the Kuru lineage, desire peace. It is fortunate that they, together with
Damodara[Krishna's name.], do not desire a war. There is no doubt that you have spoken the truth in every way. It is my view that
because you are a brahmana, your words are too sharp. There is no doubt that the Pandavas went through hardships, here and in the forest. There is no doubt that, according to dharma, they have a claim on all their ancestral
riches. Kiriti Partha is powerful. He is immensely strong and is skilled in the use of weapons. Who is there who
can withstand Pandu's son, Dhananjaya, in battle? Even the wielder of the vajra cannot, how can other archers? It
is my view that he can stand up against the three worlds."

'While Bhishma was still speaking these words, Karna glanced in Duryodhana's direction and angrily and insolently said, "O brahmana! What you have said is not unknown by any being in the world. What is the point of repeating it again and again? In earlier times, for Duryodhana's sake, Shakuni defeated Pandu's son, Yudhishthira, in
the gambling match. He went to the forest for a stipulated time. Without that time being over, he now desires his
ancestral kingdom back[The argument is that the Pandavas revealed themselves before the thirteenth year was over.]. The king depends on the strength of the Matsyas and the Panchalas. O learned one!
Duryodhana will not give up even one foot of ground because of fear. But if it is according to dharma, he will hand
over the entire earth, even to an enemy. If they desire the kingdom of their fathers and grandfathers again, they will
again have to roam around in the forest for the time that had been sworn. Then they can approach Duryodhana's
lap, without any reason for fear. Their present intentions are against dharma. This is plain stupidity. If the Pandavas
forsake dharma and wish for a war, they will remember my words when they confront the best of the Kurus."

Bhishma responded, "O Radheya! How can you speak? You should remember your own deeds, when Partha alone
vanquished the six charioteers in battle[Section 47, the fight over the cattle.]. If we do not act as this brahmana has spoken, we will certainly be killed
on the field of battle and will have to eat dust." Dhritarashtra pleaded with Bhishma and placated him. He censured
Radheya.

'He then spoke these words. "The words spoken by Shantanu's son, Bhishma, are for our own welfare, for the
welfare of the Pandavas and for the entire universe. After reflecting about this, I will send Sanjaya to the Parthas.
Therefore, you should now go back to the Pandavas without any delay." Kouravya[Dhritarashtra.] then treated him hospitably
and sent him back to the Pandavas. Having summoned Sanjaya to the assembly hall, he spoke these words.'
