Vaishampayana said, 'When they had left, Kounteya Yudhisthira, who was always wedded to the truth and had
dharma in his soul, told all his brothers, "We will have to live in this deserted forest for twelve years. Look for a
place in this great forest that has many deer and birds, with many flowers and fruit, beautiful and pure and frequented by virtuous men. We will happily spend these many autumns[Autumn as a synonym for year.] there." When he had thus spoken,
Dhananjaya replied to Dharmaraja, after having honoured that intelligent one like a preceptor and offering him the
homage due to a preceptor. "You have worshipped the ancient maharshis. There is nothing in the world of men that
is not known to you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You have always worshipped brahmanas like
Dvaipayana[Vedavyasa.] and the immensely ascetic Narada. He[Narada.] has control over himself and always roams at the gates
of all the worlds, from the world of the gods to the world of Brahma and that of gandharvas and apsaras. Without a
doubt, you know the ways of all brahmanas. O lord of the earth! You know their influence and everything. O king!
You yourself know what will bring us the best welfare. O great king! We will fix our abode wherever you desire.
There is a lake here known as Dvaitavana. It is frequented by virtuous people. It is beautiful and has many flowers
and fruit. It is frequented by many types of birds. O king! If it so pleases you, I think we can spend our twelve
years here. Or do you think otherwise?" Yudhishthira said, "O Partha! I agree with what you have said. Let us go
to the great, pure and famous lake of Dvaitavana." Thereupon, all the Pandavas, who always walked along the path
of dharma, went to the sacred lake of Dvaitavana.

'They were accompanied by many brahmanas. There were those who observed the agnihotra, those who did not
maintain the fire, those who begged for food and those who lived in the forest. Many brahmanas went with Yudhishthira. There were many hundreds of ascetics, devoted to the truth and rigid in their vows. Accompanied by
many brahmanas, the Pandavas, bulls among the Bharata lineage, arrived at the sacred and beautiful Dvaitavana. It
was the end of the hot season and the lord of the land saw the great forest covered with shalas, palm trees, mango
trees, madhukas[The ashoka tree.], nipas, kadambas[Nipas and kadambas are the same trees, similar to the ashoka.], sarjas[Tree similar to the shala.], arjunas[Name of a tree.], and karnikas[Name of a tree.]. There were peacocks on the
tops of those large trees, uttering sweet notes and there were large numbers of datyuhas and chakoras[Datyuhas and chakoras are similar birds, the former is the gallinule and the latter is the Greek partridge.
Chakoras are believed to feed on moonbeams.]. There
were also wild cuckoos in the forest. In that forest, the lord of the land also saw the leaders of large herds of elephants, which flowed with rut and stood like mountains. They were accompanied by herds of she-elephants. On
approaching the beautiful Bhogavati[The Sarasvati river. Bhogavati is also the name of the Ganga in the nether worlds.], he[Yudhishthira.] saw many who lived in the forest with dharma in their hearts, self-
controlled, attired in skins and with matted hair. He also saw many emancipated rishis. The king, foremost among
those who uphold dharma, got down from his vehicle and entered the forest, with his brothers and companions,
like the infinitely energetic Shakra[Shakra is Indra. Heaven is a loose translation. The text says trivishtapa, meaning Indra's world.] in heaven. When the one who was devoted to the truth descended, masses of
charanas[A charana is a singer or bard. But the word also means a pilgrim, more appropriate in this context.] and siddhas and dwellers of the forest approached the lion who was an Indra among men and surrounded the intelligent one. He worshipped all the siddhas and was shown homage in return, like a king or a god.
With his hands joined in salutation, the supreme one among those who uphold dharma entered[Entered the forest.], together with
all the foremost ones among the brahmanas. The great-souled one who was pure in his conduct was worshipped
like a father by the ascetics who had dharma in their hearts. Having returned the homage, the king sat down at the
foot of a large tree that was laden with flowers. Dhananjaya, Krishna, Bhima, the twins, foremost among the
Bharata lineage, and the followers of that Indra among men also dismounted from their vehicles and all of them
joined him. That large tree was bent with the weight of creepers and when the five great-souled Pandavas, all terrible archers, sat down, it looked like a giant mountain with herds of elephants around it.'
