'"Narada said, 'This is the world of the Suparnas. They are birds which kill serpents. They are not exhausted in
their valour, in travelling, or in bearing loads. O charioteer! This is the lineage that has descended from the six
sons of Vinata's son[Vinata's son is Garuda.]-Sumukha, Sunamna, Sunetra, Suvarchasa, Surupa, the king of the birds, and Subala.
There were hundreds and thousands who were born and reared in Vinata's lineage, born in the lineage of the king
of the birds. They were born in Kashyapa's lineage and extended it[The sage Kashyapa was married to Vinata.]. All of them are endowed with prosperity.
All of them are marked by the srivatsa sign[Vishnu bears the srivatsa mark (or curl) on his chest. This is the place where Lakshmi resides. Garuda is Vishnu's mount.]. All of them aspire for good fortune and bear strength. They are
kshatriyas in their deeds and are ruthless in feeding on serpents. Because they destroy their relatives[Serpents are descended from another one of Kashyapa's wives, Kadru. Therefore, serpents are related.], they never
attain the status of brahmanas. O Matali! Listen. I will recount the names of the foremost ones to you. This lineage
is extremely revered because it is favoured by Vishnu. Vishnu is their god and Vishnu is their refuge. Vishnu is always in their hearts. Vishnu is always their objective. There are Suvarnachuda, Nagashi, Daruna, Chandatundaka,
Anala, Anila, Vishalaksha, Kundali, Kashyapi, Dhvajavishkamba, Vainateya, Vamana, Vatavega, Dishachakshu,
Nimesha, Nimisha, Trivara, Saptavara, Valmiki, Dvipaka, Daityadvipa, Sariddvipa, Sarasa, Padmakesara,
Sumukha, Sukhaketu, Chitrabahu, Anagha, Meghakrita, Kumuda, Daksha, Sarpanta, Somabhojana, Gurubhara,
Kapota, Suryanetra, Chirantaka, Vishnudhanva, Kumara, Paribarha, Harita, Susvara, Madhuparka, Hemavarna,
Malaya, Matarishva, Nishakara and Divakara. I have recounted Garuda's descendants only as examples. They are
the foremost ones in fame, deeds and spirit. O Matali! If none of these appeals to you, let us proceed. I will take
you to a region where you may find what you are looking for.'"'
