Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The world was then covered in darkness and dust. The
warriors paused for an instant, without breaking the battle formations. Then the moon arose, dispelling the darkness. It made the night clear and gladdened the kshatriyas engaged in battle. When everything could be seen, the
battle resumed. It assumed a terrible form and they could not see each other. Susharma of Trigarta, and his younger
brother, rushed at the king of Matsya and surrounded him from all sides with chariots. Descending from their chariots, those bulls among the kshatriyas, grasped clubs in their hands and dashed towards the horses[Of the enemy.]. The powerful
ones were angry and attacked each other with clubs, swords, battleaxes and sharp arrows that had fine and yellow
tips[The tips were yellow because they were made of copper.]. Having vanquished all the forces of the king of Matysa with his army, Susharma, the lord of Trigarta, skilfully defeated Matsya and rushed at the great-spirited Virata. He separately killed the horses and the charioteers
who were on both sides. With the king of Matsya having lost his chariot, he[Susharma.] captured him alive. Susharma molested him, like one driven by lust acting towards a weeping bride. He made him ascend his own chariot and departed with his swift steeds.

'Virata was supremely strong. But he was bereft of his chariot and was captured. The Matsyas, oppressed by the
Trigartas, were frightened and fled. On seeing that they were terrified, Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, spoke to the
mighty-armed Bhimasena, the destroyer of enemies. "Susharma of Trigarta has captured the king of the Matsyas.
O mighty-armed one! Free him, so that he does not fall into the clutches of the enemy. All of us have lived happily
in his house. All our wishes have been met and we have been honoured well. O Bhimasena! You must act thus and
free us of the debt we owe him for our dwelling there." Bhimasena replied, "O king! On your instructions, I will
free him. Behold my extremely great deed when I fight with the enemies. Resorting to the strength of your arms,
stand here, on one side, together with our brothers. Witness my valour now. This gigantic tree stands here, with a
well-formed trunk that is like a club. I will uproot it and drive away the enemies." On seeing that his brave brother
was glancing at the tree, like an angry elephant, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira spoke to him. "O Bhima! Do not act
rashly. Let the tree stand there. You should not perform such superhuman deeds with a tree. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! People will then recognize you to be Bhima. Get hold of some other weapon that is used by men
-a bow, or a spear, a sword or a battleaxe. O Bhima! Grasp a weapon used by humans and free the lord of the
earth, so that you are not noticed by others. The immensely strong twins will guard your wheels. O son[The word used is tata.]! Thus,
arrayed in battle formation, free the king of Matsya." Then all of them goaded their horses. Using divine weapons,
they impatiently attacked the Trigartas. On seeing that the Pandavas were returning on their chariots, Virata's large
army took heart again. They were extremely enraged and performed wonderful deeds in battle.

'Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, killed one thousand. Bhima made seven hundred others see the world hereafter.
Nakula killed seven hundred with his arrows and the powerful Sahadeva killed three hundred heroes. O bull
among men! Following Yudhishthira's orders, those bulls among men, destroyed that large army of Trigarta. Maharatha King Yudhishthira swiftly rushed at Susharma and showered him with arrows. Susharma was extremely
enraged and impatiently pierced Yudhishthira with nine arrows and his horses with four. O king! Then Vrikodara,
Kunti's son, approached Susharma and destroyed his horses. Having killed the warriors stationed at the rear with
supreme arrows, he angrily brought down the charioteer from the chariot. The brave one who protected his[Susharma's.]
wheels was famous by the name of Shonashva. He was frightened on seeing that Trigarta had been robbed of his
chariot. Then Virata descended from Susharma's chariot. Grasping his[Susharma's.] club, he powerfully attacked him. Though
he was old, with a club in his hand, he attacked him like one who was young. Bhima, terrible in form and wearing
earrings, jumped down from his chariot and grasped the king of Trigarta, like a lion grasping small deer. Bereft of
his chariot, maharatha Trigarta was thus grasped. All of Trigarta's soldiers were afflicted by fear and dispersed.

'After Susharma had been defeated, the immensely strong sons of Pandu retrieved all the cattle and got back all
the riches. They had the strength of their own arms. They were humble. They were rigid in their vows. They happily spent the night amidst the forefront of that army. The maharatha Kounteyas had displayed superhuman courage
and Virata showed them homage and honoured them with riches. Virata said, "All these jewels are yours, just as
they are mine. All of you perform the tasks you wish to. Do what you wish, in accordance with what brings you
happiness. O destroyers of enemies! I will give you bejewelled maidens and many riches and whatever else comes
to your mind. It is because of your prowess that I have been freed today and am safe. Therefore, you are now lord
of the Matsyas and of everything else." All the Kouravas[Since Kuru was a common ancestor, the Pandavas are also sometimes referred to as the Kouravas.], with Yudhishthira at the forefront, separately showed
their homage to Matsya and, hands joined in salutation, said, "O lord of the earth! We are delighted with everything that you have said. It is a matter of satisfaction to us that you have now been freed from your enemies." The
king of Matsya, mighty-armed Virata and supreme among kings, was extremely pleased and again told Yudhishthira, "Come. I will instate you as the king of Matsya. O destroyer of enemies! I will give you everything that your
mind desires-gems, cattle, gold, jewels and pearls. You deserve everything. O Vaiyaghrapadya! O Indra among
brahmanas[Yudhishthira is disguised as a brahmana. He has assumed the name of Kanka, but also has the name of
Vaiyaghrapadya.]! I show you homage in every way. It is because of you that I am now alive and am able to see my
kingdom and children. The enemy, who caused me violence, is now within my powers." Then Yudhishthira again
spoke to Matsya, "O Matsya! We welcome the pleasant words that you have uttered. Always resort to non-violence
and be extremely happy always. O king! Let messengers go to your city to announce the pleasant news of your victory to your well-wishers." At these words, the king of Matsya instructed his emissaries, "Go to the city and announce my victory in battle. Let the princes be ornamented and let them come out of the city. Let there be musical
instruments. Let all the courtesans adorn themselves." They went to the city that very night. At the time of sunrise,
the messengers announced Virata's triumph.'
