Yajnavalkya said, 'Brahmanas who have seen the truth speak of the two feet as adhyatma, the act of motion
as adhibhuta and Vishnu as adhidaiva. Those who have seen the truth exactly say that the anus is adhyatma,
the releasing is adhibhuta and Mitra is adhidaiva[Mitra is sometimes equated with Surya and Mitra is adhidaiva for this organ.]. Those who know the indications of yoga say that the penis is
adhyatma, its pleasure is adhibhuta and Prajapati is adhidaiva. Those who know the indications of sankhya say that
the hands are adhyatma, tasks are adhibhuta and Indra is adhidaiva there. Those who know the indications of the
sacred texts say that speech is adhyatma, what is spoken is adhibhuta and Agni is adhidaiva there. Those who
know the indications of the sacred texts correctly say that the eyes are adhyatma, form is adhibhuta and Surya is
adhidaiva there. Those who know the indications of the sacred texts correctly say that the ears are adhyatma, sound
is adhibhuta and the directions are adhidaiva there. Those who know the truth correctly say that the tongue is adhyatma, taste is adhibhuta and water is adhidaiva there. Those who know the indications of the sacred texts correctly
say that the nose is adhyatma, smell is adhibhuta and the earth is adhidaiva there. Those who are accomplished in
their learning say that the skin is adhyatma, touch is adhibhuta and the wind is adhidaiva. Those who know the indications of the sacred texts say that the mind is adhyatma, the object of the mind is adhibhuta and the moon is adhidaiva. Those who know the true indications say that consciousness is adhyatma, pride is adhibhuta and Bhava is
adhidaiva there. Those who know the indications of the Vedas correctly say that intelligence is adhyatma, what is
understood is adhibhuta and the kshetrajna is adhidaiva. O king! O one who knows about the truth! I have thus described to you the power of the manifest and the truth about the beginning, the middle and the end. O great king!
As if in sport and easily according to her desire, Prakriti brings about hundreds and thousands of transformations in
her qualities. It is like a man lighting thousands of lamps from a single lamp. In that way, Prakriti creates many
qualities in Purusha. Spirit, joy, prosperity, contentment, radiance, happiness, purity, lack of disease, satisfaction,
devotion, generosity, lack of hatred, forgiveness, fortitude, lack of injury, equanimity, truthfulness, repayment of
debts, mildness, humility, lack of fickleness, cleanliness, uprightness, observance of conduct, lack of passion, lack
of fear in the heart, indifference at separation from good and bad things, lack of boasting about acts performed, receiving when given, lack of desire for riches, the welfare of others and compassion towards all beings-these are
said to be the qualities of sattva. The qualities of rajas are manifested in quarrels over beauty and prosperity, lack
of generosity, lack of compassion, the enjoyment of happiness and unhappiness, attachment towards speaking ill of
others, fondness for disputes, insolence, thoughts that show no respect, the practice of enmity, repentance, seizing
the property of others, lack of humility, lack of uprightness, strife, harshness, desire, anger, intoxication, pride, hatred and excessive speech. These are said to be the qualities of rajas. I will now tell you about the accumulations
that tamas leads to-delusion, lack of radiance, darkness and darkness that makes one blind. Darkness is said to be
anger and darkness that makes one blind is death. The signs of tamas are gluttony in eating, lack of satisfaction
even  though  one  has  enough  to  eat  and  drink,  attachment  towards  fragrances,  garments,  sporting,  beds,  seats,
sleeping during the day, quarrels and distraction, taking pleasure in singing, music and dancing, ignorance, lack of
faith and hatred of dharma. In particular, these are the qualities of tamas.'"'
