Brahma said, 'Among men, royal kshatriyas possess medium qualities. Among mounts, elephants are like
that. Among residents of the forest, lions are like that. Among all animals, it is the sheep[This means among sacrificial animals.]. Among those
that live in holes, it is the rat. Among cattle, it is the bull. Amidst women, it is the man. There is no doubt that in
this world, kings among men are like the Indian fig tree, the rose apple tree, the holy fig tree, the silk cotton tree,
the  Indian  rosewood  tree,  the  Indian  paintbrush  and  the  hollow  bamboo  among  trees[Respectively, nyagrodha, jambuvriksha, pippala, shalmali, shimshapa, meshashringa and kichakavena.].  They  are  like  the  Himalayas, Pariyatra, Sahya, Vindhya, Trikuta, Shveta, Nila, Bhasa, Mount Kashthavat, Shubhaskandha, Mahendra
and Mount Malyavat-kings among mountains, and like the Maruts among the ganas. The sun is the lord of the
planets and the moon of the nakshatras. Yama is the lord of the ancestors and the ocean of the rivers. Varuna is the
king of the waters and Mitra of all the spirits. The sun is said to the lord of all heated bodies and the moon of stellar bodies[The text has this repetition about the sun and the moon. There is some repetition subsequently too.]. Agni is the eternal lord of the elements and Brihaspati of brahmanas. The moon is the lord of herbs
and Vishnu of those who are supremely strong. Tvashtri is the lord of those with form and Shiva is the lord of animals. A sacrifice is the lord of dakshina and the rishis of the Vedas. The north is the king of the directions and the
powerful moon of brahmanas. Kubera is the lord of all the yakshas and Purandara of the gods. Among subjects, it
is Prajapati. This represents the various categories in which beings were created. Among all beings who are immersed in the brahman, I am the foremost. There is no one else who is superior to me or Vishnu. The great Vishnu
is immersed in the brahman and he is the king of all the kings. Know him as Ishvara, Vibhu and Prajapati. He is
the lord over all men, kinnaras, yakshas, gandharvas, serpents, rakshasas, gods, danavas and snakes. Among those
who follow the illustrious one, there is the one with beautiful eyes. She is known as Maheshvari, Mahadevi and
Parvati. Know her as the goddess Uma, supremely auspicious among women. Among the wealth of women who
provide pleasure, the apsaras are the foremost. Kings desire dharma and brahmanas possess the attributes of dharma. Therefore, kings make efforts to protect brahmanas. If virtuous people suffer in a king's kingdom, then they
take away all his qualities. After death, he moves downwards. If virtuous people are protected in a king's kingdom,
they find delight in this world and obtain the infinite after death. Those great-souled bulls among brahmanas obtain
such riches. I will tell you about how those who possess attributes of dharma always move upwards. Non-violence
is a sign of dharma. Violence is a sign of adharma. Radiance is the sign of the gods. Deeds constitute the signs of
men. Sound is the sign of space. Touch is the sign of the wind. Form is the sign of light. Taste is the sign of water.
The earth holds up all creatures and its sign is smell. Speech has the attributes of truth and is cleansed through
vowels and consonants. Thoughts constitute the attribute of the mind. These are also said to be an attribute of intelligence. Intelligence imparts purport to the thoughts in the mind. There is no doubt that it is intelligence which provides discernment. A great attribute is meditation. The attribute of a virtuous person is to remain undetected[By others.].
Pravritti is the attribute of yoga. Knowledge is the attribute of sannyasa. Therefore, in this world an intelligent person should place knowledge at the forefront and practise renunciation. United with knowledge and renunciation,
one obtains the supreme objective. Such a person overcomes opposite sentiments and darkness, death and old age.
I have properly told you about the signs of being united with dharma. After this, I will properly tell you my view
about how the qualities should be received. Smell is the quality of the earth and is received by the nose. The wind
that is in the nose has been ordained to obtain knowledge of smell. Taste is always the quality of water and is received by the tongue. Soma resides in the tongue and has been ordained to obtain knowledge of taste. Form is the
quality of light and is received by the eyes. Aditya resides in the eyes and has been ordained to obtain knowledge
of form. Touch is the quality of the wind and this is comprehended through the skin. The wind that resides in the
skin has been ordained to obtain knowledge of touch. Sound is the quality of space and this is received by the ears.
All the directions reside in the ears and are cited as those who know about sound. Thought is the quality of the
mind and this is received by wisdom. The attribute of consciousness resides in the heart and has been ordained to
obtain knowledge of the mind. Through endeavour in the use of intelligence and great meditation, one can receive
consciousness. Thus, there is no doubt that one can always comprehend the unmanifest. Kshetrajna possesses no
qualities. It is eternal and is incapable of being grasped through signs. Since kshetrajna has no manifestations, its
only attribute is knowledge. The unmanifest resides in the body and it is through this that qualities are created and
destroyed. I always see, know and hear how it is latent. Purusha knows this and that is the reason it is known as
kshetrajna. Kshetrajna sees everything about the progress of the qualities. He is ancient. Through infinite endeavour, he creates consciousness. He creates again and again. One cannot know him through the qualities of the atman. Kshetrajna can never be obtained or known through truth[He is beyond truth.]. He is the quality among all the qualities in creatures. He is supreme among the supreme and the greatest. Therefore, a person who knows about the truth casts
aside all truth about the qualities. When the sins are destroyed and qualities cast aside, one enters into kshetrajna.
Such a person is beyond opposite pairs of sentiments. Such a person does not bow down before anyone and has no
need for svadha. He does not move and he has no abode. He is actually kshetrajna and the supreme lord."'"'
