'Dhritarashtra asked, "How did Panchala Shikhandi attack the grandfather Gangeya, when he was enraged in battle? He has dharma in his soul and is rigid in his vows. When Shikhandi raised his weapons, who protected the
army of the Pandavas? Those maharathas desired victory and acted swiftly when it was the time to act fast. How
did the immensely valorous Bhishma, Shantanu's son, fight on the tenth day with the Pandavas and the Srinjayas? I
cannot tolerate the thought of Bhishma being overthrown by Shikhandi in battle. Was his[Bhishma's.] chariot shattered?
Did his bow break into fragments?"

'Sanjaya said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! When he fought in that battle, Bhishma's bow was not shattered. Nor was his chariot broken. He used straight-tufted arrows to kill the enemies in that encounter. O king!
Many hundred and thousand maharathas on your side and large numbers of chariots, elephants and horses, with
excellent harnesses, advanced to do battle, placing the grandfather at the forefront. O Kouravya! The victorious
one stuck to his vow. Bhishma continuously slaughtered the soldiers of the Parthas. The great archer fought and
killed the enemy with his arrows. All the Panchalas, together with the Pandavas, could not resist him. When the
tenth day arrived, he scorched the army of the enemy. He released sharp arrows in hundreds and thousands. O Pandu's elder brother! The Pandavas were incapable of defeating Bhishma, the great archer, in battle. He was like
Yama with a noose in his hand. O great king! Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies and the one who was never defeated, arrived at the spot, causing terror among all the rathas. He roared like a lion. He repeatedly drew his bow
and released a shower of arrows. Partha roamed around on the field of battle, like Death. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Those on your side were frightened at the sound. O king! They fled in great fear, like deer because of a
lion. On witnessing that Partha was victorious and that your soldiers were oppressed by him, Duryodhana was
greatly tormented and spoke to Bhishma. 'O father[The word used is tata.]! This son of Pandu is borne by white horses and has
Krishna as a charioteer. He is scorching all those on my side, like the one with the black trails in a forest. O
Gangeya! Behold. The soldiers are running away in every direction. O foremost among warriors! They are being
slaughtered and driven away by Pandava in this battle. They are like a herd of cattle being driven by a herdsman in
the forest. O scorcher of enemies! My soldiers are being driven away. They are being shattered by Dhananjaya's
arrows. They are running away, here and there. It is like a herdsman driving away a herd of cattle in the forest. O
scorcher of enemies! My soldiers are being driven away in that fashion. They are being shattered through Dhananjaya's arrows and are fleeing in different directions. The invincible Bhima is driving away my soldiers. Satyaki,
Chekitana, the Pandavas who are Madri's sons and the valiant Abhimanyu are scorching my army. The brave
Dhrishtadyumna and rakshasa Ghatotkacha, immensely strong, are impetuously driving away my soldiers. In every
way, my soldiers are being slaughtered by those immensely strong ones. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
making them remain in this battle, I do not see any succour other than you, tiger among men and like the gods in
your valour. You are my refuge in this oppression. You should swiftly counter them.' O great king! Thus addressed, your father, Devavrata, thought for some time and made up his mind.

'"Shantanu's son consoled your son. 'O Duryodhana! O lord of the earth! Be patient and listen to what I have to
say to you. O immensely strong one! In earlier times, I had taken a pledge that I would kill ten thousand great-
souled kshatriyas every day and would then return from the battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! For the sake
of your welfare, I have carried out the pledge I made to you. I will perform an even greater task in this great battle
today. I will sleep after being slain, or I will kill the Pandavas today. O tiger among men! I will today free myself
from the great debt I owe you. O king! You offered me food as my master. I will be slain at the forefront of the
army.' Having spoken these words, the best of the Bharata lineage scattered arrows among the kshatriyas. The invincible one attacked the Pandava army. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Gangeya stationed himself in the midst
of the army, like an angry and virulent serpent, and the Pandavas surrounded him. On the tenth day, he exhibited
his strength. O king! The descendant of the Kuru lineage killed hundreds and thousands. He sucked out the energy
from the best of the Panchalas and the immensely strong princes, like the sun sucking up water with its rays. O
great king! The spirited one killed ten thousand elephants and then killed ten thousand horses, with their riders.
The best of men killed two hundred thousand foot soldiers. Bhishma was dazzling in that battle, like a flame without smoke. No one among the Pandaveyas was capable of looking at him. He was like the scorching sun, when it is
on its northern path. But though they were oppressed, the Pandaveyas, great archers, together with the maharatha
Srinjayas, attacked and sought to kill Bhishma. There were many who fought with Bhishma, Shantanu's son, then.
The mighty-armed one looked like a mountain that was occupied by clouds. Your sons surrounded Gangeya from
every direction, together with a large army, and the battle raged on."'
