'Arjuna said, "When I was skilled in weapons and had obtained his confidence, Harivahana[Harivahana is Indra's epithet. Literally, this means someone whose horses (means of transport) are tawny.] touched my head
with his hands and spoke these words. 'Today, the masses of gods are incapable of vanquishing you in battle, not
to speak of humans of the world who have not perfected their souls. You are immeasurable and unassailable. You
are also incomparable in battle.' Then, with his body hair standing up, the god again said, 'O brave one! There will
be no one who will be your match in fighting with weapons. You are never distracted. You are skilled. You are
truthful and in control of your senses. You are like a brahmana. You are skilled in the usage of weapons. O extender of the Kuru lineage! You have obtained ten weapons and five[The five types of weapons are mukta (those that are released from the hand, like a chakra), amukta (those
that are never released, like a sword), muktamukta (those that can be released or not released, like a spear), yantra-
mukta (those that are released from an implement, like an arrow) and mantramukta (magical weapons unleashed
with incantations). These are categories of weapons. It is difficult to pinpoint the ten. In all probability, that number refers to weapons by name, rather than types. Shula (spear), tomara (club), gada (mace), parashu (battleaxe),
mudgara (hammer), vajra, chakra, kshepini (sling), asi (sling) and bhindipala (javelin) might be such a possible
list.]. O Partha! Know that you have no equal in all
the five ways. O Dhananjaya! You know how to employ, restrain, return, pacify and counteract them[These five techniques are especially important for divyastras, that is, divine or magical weapons. Atonement is necessary if such a magical weapon has been discharged inappropriately, at the wrong person.]. You
know everything about atonement and repulsion. O scorcher of enemies! The time has now come for you to pay
your preceptor's fees. Promise to pay it and then I will tell you what you have to do.' O king! At that, I spoke these
words to the king of the gods. 'If it is in my power to do it, then consider it done.' O king! Bala and Vritra's slayer
smiled and told me, 'There is nothing in the three worlds that is impossible for you. The danavas named nivatakavachas are my enemies. They live in an inaccessible spot, along the shores of the ocean. They are thirty million in number and they are identical in form, strength and radiance. O Kounteya! Destroy them there. That will be
the preceptor's fee.' He gave me the immensely radiant and divine chariot, driven by Matali. It was yoked to horses that had hair as beautiful as the feathers of peacocks. He tied an excellent diadem on my head. He gave me ornaments for the body, similar to those he himself wore and this supreme, beautiful and impenetrable armour, pleasant to the touch. I strung Gandiva with this string that does not decay.

'"I then set out on that resplendent chariot, on which, in earlier times, the lord of the gods vanquished Bali, Virochana's son. All the gods were alerted by the roar. O lord of the earth! Thinking me to be the king of the gods,
they assembled and having seen me, asked, 'O Phalguna! What will you do?' I then told them exactly what had
occurred and said, 'I will do this in battle. I am departing to kill the nivatakavachas. O immensely fortunate ones!
O unblemished ones! O pure ones! Give me your blessings.' They were as satisfied and pleased with me as the god
Purandara. 'Ascended on this chariot, Maghavan vanquished in battle Shambara, Namuchi, Bala, Vritra, Prahlada
and Naraka. On this chariot, Maghavan vanquished in battle many thousands, prayutas and arbudas of daityas[Prayuta is a million, arbuda is one hundred million.].
O Kounteya! You will also vanquish the nivatakavachas in battle and show your prowess, just as the self-controlled Maghavan did earlier. Here is the supreme conch shell with which you will conquer the danavas. Using this,
the great-souled Shakra conquered the worlds[The gods told Arjuna this.].' The gods gave me Devadatta[The name of the conch shell.], obtained from the waters,
and I accepted it. Then, for the sake of victory, the immortals praised me. Desiring to fight, I left for the terrible
abode of the danavas, with the conch shell, armour and arrows, having grasped the bow firmly."'
