'Uttara said, "O brave one! Ascend this large chariot with me as the charioteer. Which of the armies would you
like to attack? As instructed by you, I will take you there."

'Arjuna replied, "O tiger among men! I am pleased that you no longer have any fear. O one who is skilled in
battle! I will disperse all of your enemies in battle. O immensely intelligent one! Be steady and behold me fight
with the enemies. I will accomplish extremely terrible deeds. Swiftly tie all these quivers to my chariot. Take that
polished sword that is embellished with gold. I will fight with the Kurus and recover your animals. Protected by
my arms, this chariot of yours, with its three poles and quivers, with many flags, will be like a city protected by
turrets and gates. Its sides will be guarded by my resolution. When I am angered, the twang of my bow will make
the axle sound like kettle drums. I, the wielder of the Gandiva, will be established on the chariot in battle. I am incapable of being vanquished by enemy soldiers. O son of Virata! Shed all your fears."

'Uttara said, "I am no longer afraid of them. I know that you are steadfast in battle. I know that you are the equal
of Keshava, or Indra himself, in battle. But thinking about one thing, I am overcome by confusion. It is certain that
I am foolish, because I cannot arrive at any conclusion. You have the form of a brave one and bear all the auspicious marks. Through what adverse circumstances did you become a eunuch? You are like the wielder of the trident[Shiva is the wielder of the trident.], or a king of the gandharvas, or the god Shatakratu[Shatakratu is Indra's name and literally means the performer of one hundred sacrifices.]. I think of you roaming in the attire of a eunuch."

'Arjuna replied, "I am telling you truthfully, I have observed this vow for a year, on the instructions of my elder
brother[Yudhishthira.]. I have observed brahmacharya. O mighty-armed one! I am not a eunuch, but united with dharma, have
followed another[Meaning Yudhishthira.]. O son of a king! Know that my vow has been completed[Because the one year of disguise is over.]."
'Uttara said, "I am extremely delighted today that my conclusions have not been proved wrong. Those who are
supreme among men cannot be eunuchs like these. I have now obtained an aide in battle and can fight even with
the immortals. My fears have been destroyed. Tell me what I should do. I will control your horses, which are capable of vanquishing the chariots of enemies. O bull among men! I have been trained in driving a chariot by an expert. O bull among men! Know that I have been trained as a charioteer, like Daruka for Vasudeva and Matali for
Shakra[Daruka is Vasudeva's (Krishna's) charioteer and Matali is Shakra's (Indra's).]. The horse that is yoked to the right of the pole is like Sugriva and when his feet touch the ground, they
can hardly be seen[Sugriva, Sainya, Meghapushpa and Balahaka are the names of Krishna's horses.]. I think that the other beautiful horse that is yoked to the left of the pole is like Meghapushpa
in its speed. I think that the beautiful horse with the golden harness that is yoked to the left of the axle is superior
in strength and speed to Sainya. I think that the one that is yoked to the right of the axle is superior in strength and
speed to Balahaka. This chariot is capable of bearing an archer like you in battle. While stationed on this chariot, it
is my view that you will be able to fight."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The brave and strong one[Arjuna.] took the bracelets off from his arms. He donned beautiful
wrist guards that would sound like drums. He tied his black and curly hair in a white garment. He swiftly strung
Gandiva and drew the bow. When the bow was drawn, it uttered a great sound, as if a giant rock had been dashed
against another rock. The earth trembled and a turbulent wind began to blow. The birds were confused in the sky.
The giant trees began to tremble. From the sound that was like the roar of thunder, the Kurus got to know that Arjuna was on the chariot and was drawing the best of bows with his arms.'
