Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Having seen Kurukshetrra and having given away gifts, Satvata went to an
extremely great and divine hermitage. It had groves of madhuka and mango trees and also plakshas and nyagrodhas. It had sacred bilvas, jackfruit and arjunas[Madhuka is a kind of tree. Plaksha is the religious fig tree. Nyagrodha
is the Indian fig tree. Bilva is bel and arjuna is a tall tree.]. On seeing that supreme place, marked with all the auspicious signs, the foremost among the Yadava lineage asked all the rishis whom that excellent hermitage belonged
to. O king! All those great-souled ones told the one with the plough as his weapon, "O Rama! Listen to whom this
hermitage belonged to in earlier times. In earlier times, the god Vishnu observed supreme austerities here. It is here
that he performed all the eternal sacrifices, according to the prescribed rites. It was here that the brahmana lady observed brahmacharya from her youth and was immersed in yoga. Having attained success through her austerities,
the ascetic lady went to heaven. O king! The great-souled Shandilya obtained a beautiful daughter. She was virtuous and firm in her vows. She always followed brahmacharya. Having achieved supreme yoga, she went to the excellent place of heaven. In this hermitage, the auspicious one obtained the fruits that can be got through the performance of a horse sacrifice. The immensely fortunate one was controlled in her soul. She was revered and went to
heaven." The bull among the Yadu lineage went to the sacred hermitage and saw it. Having greeted the rishis who
dwelt along the slopes of the Himalayas, Achyuta began to climb that mountain.

'The powerful one, with the palm tree on his banner, had only advanced a short distance along that mountain.
He then saw a supreme and sacred tirtha and was overcome by great wonder. Bala saw the powers of the Sarasvati
at Plakshaprasravana. He reached the supreme and excellent tirtha of Karapachana. The immensely strong wielder
of the plough gave away gifts there. He bathed in the cool waters and, extremely happy, went to the hermitage of
Mitra and Varuna. This was the region of Karapachana, along the Yamuna. It was the place where Indra, Agni and
Aryama had obtained great happiness. The one with dharma in his soul went and bathed there. He obtained
supreme satisfaction. The immensely strong bull among the Yadu lineage seated himself with the rishis and the
siddhas and listened to their sacred accounts.

'While Rama was seated among them at that spot, the illustrious rishi Narada arrived there. He had matted hair.
The great ascetic was attired in garments with a golden complexion. O king! He had a golden staff and a water pot
in his hands. The lute, the melodious veena that made a pleasant noise, was in his hands[The text uses the word kacchapi. This means a lute, which is the sense
in which we have translated it. However, this could also mean that the
veena was made of tortoise shell.]. He was skilled in
dancing and singing and was worshipped by the gods and the brahmanas. However, he was also one who provoked
quarrels and always loved dissension[Narada liked to incite quarrels.]. He came to the spot where the handsome Rama was. All of them stood
up and honoured the one who was careful in his vows. He[Balarama.] asked the devarshi about what had happened to the
Kurus. O king! Narada knew about all forms of dharma and told him everything as it had occurred and about the
destruction of the Kurus. Rohini's son was distressed and asked Narada, "How are the kshatriyas? How are the
kings? O one who is rich in austerities! I have heard everything about this earlier. But I wish to hear it in detail. I
am curious."

'Narada replied, "Bhishma, Drona and the lord of Sindhu have been killed earlier. Vaikartana Karna and his maharatha sons have been slain. O Rohini's son! So have Bhurishrava and the valiant king of Madra. So have many
other extremely strong ones. For the sake of pleasing the Kouravas, they have given up their lives. The kings and
princes refused to retreat in the battle. O mighty-armed one! O Madhava! Listen to the ones who have not been
killed. Dhritarashtra's powerful son, Kripa, the valiant Bhoja and the brave Ashvatthama are left. But with the soldiers routed, they have fled in different directions. When the soldiers were slain and Kripa and the others ran away,
Duryodhana was overcome by great grief and has entered the lake Dvaipayana. Dhritarashtra's son is lying down
there, having turned the waters to stone. O Rama! The Pandavas and Krishna approached and, from every direction, have tormented the powerful one with harsh and eloquent words. The brave one has arisen and has grasped a
mighty club. O Rama! The extremely terrible encounter with Bhima is about to commence and will take place today. O Madhava! If you are curious, go there without any delay. If you so desire, witness that extremely terrible
encounter between your two disciples." '

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing Narada's words, he[Balarama.] honoured the bulls among the brahmanas and took their
leave. He asked all those who had come with him to leave. He requested his attendants to return to Dvaraka. He
descended from the best of mountains and from the sacred Plakshaprasravana. Having heard about the great fruits
that could be obtained from that tirtha, Rama was delighted. In the presence of the brahmanas, Achyuta also sang a
shloka. "Where can one obtain delight like the one obtained from dwelling along the Sarasvati? Where can one obtain qualities like those obtained from dwelling along the Sarasvati? Having approached Sarasvati, people go to
heaven. The river Sarasvati should always be remembered. Sarasvati is the most sacred of rivers. Sarasvati always
bestows happiness on the worlds. Even those who have performed extremely wicked deeds approach Sarasvati and
do not have to sorrow, in this world or in the next." In delight, he repeatedly glanced towards Sarasvati. The
scorcher of enemies then ascended an excellent chariot to which horses had been yoked. The bull among the Yadu
lineage ascended the chariot that could travel fast. He wished to witness the encounter that was going to take place
between his two disciples.'
