'Bhishma said, "Parts of kalas, muhurtas[A kala is a small unit of time. Its precise length varies according to the source and can be one minute, forty-
eight seconds or eight seconds. A muhurta is forty-eight minutes.], days, fortnights, months, nakshatras, planets, seasons and years are
joined together and the wheel of time revolves in accordance with these measurements of time. Because of an excess of time and deviations in the paths of bodies in the sky, there is an addition of two months in every cycle of
five years[There is a minor misstatement in the numbers. The twelve lunar months, add up to 354 days and eight hours.
 But the solar year has 365 days and six hours. Hence, there is an excess of eleven days in every year and fifty-
five days in every five years, just short of two months.]. I think that calculated in this way, during the passage of thirteen years, there are five additional
months and twelve nights[There is an implicit astronomical calculation that is not obvious. If one takes the simple statement of two additional months in every five years, the text should have stated five months and fourteen or fifteen days (depending
on what is being taken as the length of the lunar month). On the other hand, if one is being precise, there are an extra 143 days in thirteen years. Whatever be the length of the lunar month, this doesn't add up to five months and
twelve days. For example, if the average lunar month is taken to be twenty-eight days, there are 140 days in five
months and one has an excess of three days, not twelve.]. They have done everything that they had promised to do. Knowing this for certain,
Bibhatsu has arrived. All of them are great-souled and knowledgeable about dharma and artha. They have Yudhishthira as the king. Why should they act contrary to dharma? The Kounteyas are not avaricious and they have
accomplished a difficult feat. They have Yudhishthira as their king. Why should they act contrary to dharma? They
do not wish to acquire the kingdom by any means possible. Else, the descendants of the Kuru lineage would have
displayed their valour at that time. They are bound by the nooses of dharma and they have not deviated from the
vow of kshatriyas. If there is a choice between being called untruthful and confronting defeat, the Parthas would
choose death over being untruthful. But the time has now arrived. Such is the valour of those bulls among men, the
Pandavas, who are protected by the wielder of the vajra, that they will not give up what is their due. We must
counter in battle the supreme among those who are skilled in weapons. Therefore, let everything be swiftly done,
so that our objectives are not taken over by others, and so that the virtuous ones of the world do not think that we
are against welfare. O Kourava! O Indra among kings! I have never witnessed a battle where success has been assured. Dhananjaya has arrived. When one engages in battle, there is prosperity and adversity, victory and defeat.
One will confront one or the other. I have seen this without a doubt. Therefore, let us carry out the tasks that are
needed for war, as long as those deeds are in conformity with dharma. Dhananjaya has arrived."

'Duryodhana replied, "O grandfather! I will not give the kingdom away to the Pandavas. Therefore, without any
delay, let us make arrangements for the battle."

'Bhishma said, "If it pleases you to listen, hear what my advice is. Take one-fourth of the army and quickly
leave for the city. Let another one-fourth gather the cattle and leave. We will counter Pandava with the remaining
half of the army, or Matsya if he arrives again, or Shatakratu himself. Let the preceptor be stationed in the middle,
with Ashvatthama on the left. Let the wise Kripa, the son of Sharadvat, protect the right flank. Karna, the armoured
son of the suta, should be stationed in the front. I will station myself behind the entire army, so as to protect it."'
