Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing all the Pandavas anxious and miserable in their minds, Dhoumya, who was like
Brihaspati himself, reassured them and said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! Let me mention sacred
hermitages, directions, tirthas and mountains approved of by brahmanas. Listen as I speak. O king! O Yudhishthira! As I remember it, I will first describe to you the beautiful eastern direction, frequented by masses of rajarshis.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that region there is a place named Naimisha, desired by the devarshis.
There are sacred tirthas, holy to separate gods. The beautiful and holy Gomati flows here, frequented by devarshis.
There is the sacrificial ground of the gods and Vivasvat's sacrificial site is here. Sacred Gaya, supreme among
mountains and worshipped by rajarshis, is there. There is Brahma's sacred lake, frequented by rishis and the thirty
gods. O tiger among men! It is for this reason that the ancient ones have declared that if one desires many sons,
one should go to Gaya alone. O unblemished one! Mahanadi is there and also Gayashira. There is also a banyan
tree, celebrated by the brahmanas as Akshayakarana[Literally, the cause (karana) of that which never decays (akshaya).]. O lord! The food that is given to the ancestors there, becomes inexhaustible. A great river named Phalgu flows there and its waters are sacred. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! There is also Koushiki, with many roots and fruit. Vishvamitra, rich in austerities, became a brahmana
there. The sacred river Ganga is there. O son! Bhagiratha performed many sacrifices on its banks and gave away a
lot of gifts.

'"O Kouravya! It is said that there is Utpala in Panchala. Koushika Vishvamitra[Koushika is one of Vishvamitra's names. Kusha was his great grandfather.] performed a sacrifice there
with Shakra. On witnessing Vishvamitra's superhuman powers, Jamadagni's illustrious son recounted his lineage
there[Jamadagni's son was Parashurama. While there are different versions of the Vishvamitra story, the reference
here is to the story where Vishvamitra was almost like Parashurama's ancestor. Gadhi had a daughter named Satyavati and she was married to Richika. Gadhi was a kshatriya and Richika was a brahmana. Richika prepared some
boiled rice. Part of this was to be given to Satyavati, so that she would have a son with the characteristics of a
brahmana and part was to be given to Satyavati's mother, so that she would have a son with the characteristics of a
kshatriya. But these were interchanged. Consequently, Satyavati's mother gave birth to Vishvamitra and Satyavati
gave birth to Jamadagni.]. In Kanyakubja[Kannauj in Uttar Pradesh.], Koushika drank soma with Indra and withdrawing himself from the kshatriya class,
announced that he was a brahmana. O brave one! There is the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna, renowned
in the world. It is pure and sacred, supreme among purifying places, and is visited by the sages. In earlier times,
the grandfather[Brahma.], the soul of all beings, performed a sacrifice there. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! That
is the reason it has become famous as Prayaga[Yaga is a sacrifice.]. O Indra among kings! O king! There is Agastya's supreme and
great hermitage. There is the peak named Hiranyabindu on Kalanjara. O king! There is another mountain that is
more pure and sacred than all other mountains. O Kouravya! This is the great-souled Bhargava's[Parashurama.] Mahendra. O
Kounteya! O Yudhishthira! In earlier times, the grandfather performed a sacrifice there and the sacred Bhagirathi
was where the officiating priests were seated. O lord of the earth! The sacred and famous Brahmashala[The name of a river.] is there.
Its mere sight is pure and its banks are crowded by those whose sins have been cleansed. There is also the pure,
auspicious, eternal, supreme and great hermitage of the great-souled Matanga, famous in the world by the name of
Kedara. The beautiful Kundoda mountain has roots, fruits and water. The thirsty nishada[Nala.] found water and shelter there. There is the beautiful grove of the gods there, adorned with ascetics. There are the rivers Bahuda and
Nanda, on the peak of the mountain. O great king! I have recounted for you tirthas, rivers, mountains and sacred
spots that are in the eastern direction. Now hear from me about sacred tirthas, rivers and mountains in the other
three directions."'
