'Vidura said, "In this connection, we have heard the ancient history of the conversation between Atreya and the
Sadhyas quoted. The maharshi[Atreya, the son of the sage Atri.], rigid in his vows, was roaming around in the form of a swan. In ancient times,
the gods, the Sadhyas, asked the immensely wise one. 'O maharshi! We are the gods known as the Sadhyas. We
can see you, but we are unable to understand who you are. It is our view that you are learned, steadfast and intelligent. Tell us great words that are full of wisdom.'

'"The swan replied, 'O immortals! I have heard that one's task is to be steady, self-controlled, truthful and devoted to dharma. Having loosened all the knots of one's heart, one should equally control that which is pleasant
and that which is unpleasant. When one is reviled, one should not revile in return. One should endure it. This torments the one who reviles and you enjoy the fruits of his good deeds. Do not revile. Do not insult an enemy. Do
not quarrel with friends, or serve those who are inferior. Do not be vain. Do not be inferior in conduct. Avoid harsh
words and those that come from anger. Terrible words pierce the innards, the bones and the hearts of men and burn
them. Therefore, one must avoid harsh and angry words. One who seeks delight in dharma, must always avoid
them. If one hurts men with harsh and scathing words, words that are like wounding thorns to men, such an unfortunate person bears death and misery on his face. When an enemy strikes with extremely sharp arrows that burn
like the fire and the sun, and though pierced one withstands it, a wise one knows that the fruits of the good deeds of
the other one[The enemy.] devolve on him. If one serves a virtuous man or one who is not virtuous, an ascetic or a thief, just
as garments are coloured by dyes, one is accordingly coloured by one's associates. If one does not revile in return
when one is reviled and does not make others revile, if one does not strike back in return when one is struck and
does not make others strike, if one does not wish to injure an assailant, the gods wish for the association and arrival
of such a person. First, it is better not to speak than to speak. Second, if one speaks, one should speak the truth.
Third, if one speaks, one should say that which is pleasant. Fourth, if one speaks pleasant truth, it should be in accordance with dharma. A man becomes like the one he converses with, like the one he serves, and like the one he
wishes to be. One becomes free of whatever one keeps oneself away from. By turning away from everything, the
least bit of unhappiness vanishes. Such a person is not vanquished, nor does he wish to vanquish others. He has no
enmity, nor does he strike back. He is equally disposed towards praise and blame. He does not sorrow and he does
not rejoice. He wishes for the welfare of everyone and his mind does not harbour ill will towards anyone. He is
truthful, mild and self-controlled. Such a man is superior. One who does not placate without reason, one who gives
what he has promised and one who knows good deeds and bad ones-such a man is medium. He who is difficult to
control, he who strikes back instead of being instructed, he who cannot control himself when overcome by anger,
he who is ungrateful, he who is without friends and evil-souled-these are the signs of a worst man. He does not
appreciate the good things done by others. He is distrustful of himself. He drives away his friends. Such a man is
the worst. If one desires prosperity for one's own self, one must serve superior men and medium ones at the right
time. But one must never serve the worst. Riches can be obtained through force, constant endeavour, wisdom and
manliness. But this still does not warrant complete praise, or the conduct that characterizes those born in great
lineages."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "The gods desire those who have been born in great lineages, those who are extremely
learned and are always devoted to dharma and artha. O Vidura! I have a question to ask you. What makes a lineage
great?"

'Vidura replied, "Great lineages of appropriate conduct are those in which seven qualities are resident-austerity, self-control, knowledge of the brahman, sacrifices, purity, marriages and constant donation of food. They do not
deviate from good conduct, nor do their descendants suffer. They practise dharma through good conduct. They desire to distinguish their lineages through deeds. They discard falsehood. Such are great lineages. Through the nonperformance of sacrifices, through bad marriages, through neglect of the Vedas and through transgression of dharma, lineages degenerate. By destroying what is due to the gods, by stealing the property of brahmanas and by causing offence to brahmanas, lineages degenerate. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By oppressing brahmanas and
speaking ill of them and by stealing what has been entrusted to them, lineages degenerate. Lineages that own cattle, men and horses are not reckoned as foremost lineages if they are inferior in conduct. Lineages that are deficient
in riches, but are good in conduct, accumulate great fame, and are reckoned as the foremost of lineages. Let no one
in our lineage engender enmity. Let no one who is an adviser to the king steal someone else's property, exhibit enmity towards friends, indulge in falsehood or deceit and eat before the ancestors, the gods and the guests. No one
who kills a brahmana, no one who hates a brahmana and no one who causes an obstruction to agriculture should
have an association with us. A seat made of straw, a place on the floor, water and sweet words as the fourth, are
never lacking in the homes of the good. O king! O immensely wise one! Those who observe good conduct and are
pure in their deeds and devoted to dharma, offer these with complete devotion to others. O king! Even though it is
thin, a syandana tree[Syandana is both a tree and a term for a chariot. A chariot was so named because its wheels were made from the
syandana tree.] can bear loads that other larger trees cannot. Thus, those born in great lineages can bear
great burdens that other men cannot.

'"He whose anger engenders fear, is not a friend. He who has to be served with anxiety, is not a friend. He is a
friend who can be trusted like a father. Others are friends only by association. If someone is not a relative, but acts
through friendly sentiments, he is a relative, a friend, a refuge and a protector. A man who is fickle in his mind and
does not serve the elders, if his disposition is changing and is not constant, it will be difficult for him to collect
friends. Prosperity deserts those who are fickle in their minds, those who are not in control of their souls and those
who are under the control of their senses, just as swans desert a dry lake. Sudden anger and pacification without
reason are not the signs of those who have good conduct, like clouds that are not constant. There are those who are
served by their friends, but are ungrateful and do not treat them well. Even predatory beasts do not touch their
corpses. Whether one is rich or poor, one must always ask favours from friends. Without asking, one does not
know whether the friends are deep or shallow. Grief destroys beauty. Grief destroys strength. Grief destroys
knowledge. Grief brings on disease. Nothing is gained through sorrow, only the body is tormented. This only delights the enemies. Therefore, do not sorrow in your mind.

'"Man dies and is born again and again. Man withers and grows again and again. Man asks, and is asked, again
and again. Man grieves, and is grieved over, again and again. Happiness and unhappiness, prosperity and adversity,
gain and loss, death and life-all of these touch everyone by turn. Therefore, a wise person neither rejoices, nor
grieves. The six senses[The five senses and the mind.] are not constant. Wherever one of them increases disproportionately, the intelligence
oozes out, like water from a pot with holes."

'Dhritarashtra said, "The king[Yudhishthira.] shines like a thin and high flame. I have treated him with falsehood. He will destroy my evil sons in battle. Everything always seems to be a cause for anxiety and therefore, my mind is always
anxious. O immensely intelligent one! Tell me that which will relieve me of my anxiety."

'Vidura replied, "O unblemished one! I see no peace for you, other than in learning, austerities, control of the
senses and discarding of avarice. Intelligence drives away fear. Austerities lead to greatness. Service of preceptors
leads to knowledge. Yoga leads to peace. Those who desire salvation roam around, free from love and hatred, and
without resorting to the merits of donations and the merits of the Vedas. After studies that have been learnt well,
after battles that have been fought well, after deeds that have been performed well and after austerities that have
been performed well, happiness increases. Those who have been separated from their relatives cannot find sleep,
no matter how well the beds may have been prepared. O king! They find no pleasure from intercourse with
women, or from the praises of bards and minstrels. Those who have been separated from their relatives do not observe dharma. Those who have been separated in this way do not find happiness. Those who have been separated
in this way do not attain fame. Those who have been separated in this way do not appreciate peace. They are not
satisfied with the advice offered to them. They cannot find yoga and kshema[Yoga has several meanings. It also means obtaining that which one does not possess, while kshema means protecting that which one already possesses.]. O Indra among men! Those who
are separated have no end, but for destruction. Milk is possible in cows. Austerities are possible in brahmanas.
Fickleness is possible in women. Like that, fear is possible from one's relatives. Those who are learned use the
metaphor of many long and thin threads. When they are joined together, because they are many, they can bear a
large load. O Dhritarashtra! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Relatives are like kindling. When separated, they
produce smoke. But when they are together, they blaze. O Dhritarashtra! Those who are severe towards brahmanas, women, relatives and cows fall down, like ripe fruit from stalks. A large tree that stands on its own, even if
it is strong and firmly rooted, can in an instant be brought down by the wind, with its branches and its trunk. But if
trees grow together and are firmly rooted, because they support each other, they can withstand stronger winds.
Whatever be the qualities he may possess, enemies think that a single man is capable of being harmed, like a single
tree against the wind. But because of mutual assistance and mutual support, relatives prosper together, like lotuses
in a lake. Brahmanas, cows, women, children, relatives, those whose food one has partaken and those who have
sought refuge must not be killed. O king! Even if he is rich, there is no quality greater in a man than that he should
be without disease. O fortunate one! Those who are ill are the equals of those who are dead. Even if there is no disease, anger is like a headache. It is harsh, sharp and pungent and leads to evil. The good swallow it up, while the
evil do not swallow it. O great king! Drink it up and be pacified. Those who are oppressed by disease do not care
about the fruits. Nor do they obtain any satisfaction from objects. Those who are diseased are always full of unhappiness. They do not know the comforts of riches, or of happiness.

'"O king! I spoke to you before, when I saw Droupadi won at the gambling match. But you did not listen to my
advice. 'Restrain Duryodhana. Stop him from gambling. Those who are learned, shun deceit. It is not strength if it
runs counter to mildness. The mixed nature of dharma should be swiftly followed. Prosperity that is based on cruelty is destroyed, but if it is both mild and firm, it descends to the sons and the grandsons.' Let the sons of Dhritarashtra protect the Pandavas. Let the sons of Pandu protect your sons. Let the Kurus be united in their counsel
and have the same enemies and friends. O king! Let them live in happiness and prosperity. O Ajamidha! You are
now the pillar of the Kouravas. The lineage of the Kurus depends on you. The Parthas are young and have been
tormented by their sojourn in the forest. O father[The word used is tata.]! Preserve your fame by protecting them. Ensure an alliance between the Kouravas and the sons of Pandu. Let your enemies not seek out a weakness. O god among men! Let all
of them be established in truth. O Indra among men! Restrain Duryodhana."'
