Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-souled Keshava spoke these words, all those who were in the assembly hall
sat immobile in their seats, their body hair standing up. No man present ventured to voice a reply. All the kings
thought in their hearts. All the kings there remained silent.

'Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.] then spoke these words in that assembly of the Kurus, "O king! Listen to the example that I
am going to cite. Do not entertain any doubt about it not being true. When you have heard it, if you so think fit, decide on what is best for you. In earlier times, there was a king named Dambhodbhava. He conquered the entire
earth. We have heard that he enjoyed the entire earth. When night had passed, this valorous maharatha would always awake in the morning and ask brahmanas and kshatriyas, 'Is there anyone, a shudra, a vaishya, a kshatriya or
a brahmana who wields weapons, who is my equal or superior in battle?' Saying this, the king roamed around the
earth. He was so intoxicated with great insolence that he thought of no one else. There were noble and learned
brahmanas who feared nothing. They cautioned the king against his repeated expressions of pride. But though he
was forbidden, that wicked one kept questioning those brahmanas. He was vain and intoxicated with his prosperity.
Those great-souled brahmanas were ascetics. They observed the vows of the Vedas. Blazing with anger, they told
the insolent king, 'There are two lions among men who have fought in battles in many lives. O king! There is no
way that you will be their equal.' Having been thus addressed, the king again asked those brahmanas, 'Where are
those brave ones? Where have they been born? What are their deeds? Who are they?' The brahmanas replied, 'We
have heard that they are the two ascetics Nara and Narayana. They have come to this world of men. O king! Fight
with them. It is said that the great-souled Nara and Narayana are tormenting themselves with great austerities in
some undetermined region of Gandhamadana.'"

'Rama[Parashurama.] said, "The king gathered a large army with six divisions. He intolerantly marched to where those unvanquished ones dwelt. He went to the uneven and terrible Mount Gandhamadana. He advanced, looking for those
two unvanquished ascetics. He saw those supreme among men, lean from hunger and thirst, their veins holding
them together. They were afflicted by the cold, the wind and the heat. He approached them, touched their feet and
asked about their welfare. They honoured the king with roots, fruits, a seat and water and asked him, 'What can be
done for you?' Dambhodbhava replied, 'The earth has been conquered with my arms and all the enemies have
been slain. I have now come to this mountain, wishing to fight with you. Grant that to me as a mark of hospitality. I
have desired this for a long time.' Nara and Narayana said, 'O supreme among kings! Anger and avarice have been
banished from this hermitage. There are no fights in this hermitage. Where are the weapons and where is the malice? Go and desire a fight elsewhere. There are many kshatriyas on earth.' Though spoken to in this way, he kept
on insisting. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They refused and repeatedly tried to placate him.

'"But Dambhodbhava was eager to fight and challenged the ascetics. O Kourava! Nara then picked up some
blades of grass in his fist and told him, 'O kshatriya! You desire to fight. Come and fight. Bring all your weapons
and prepare your army. From now onwards, I will destroy your love for war forever.' Dambhodbhava replied, 'O
ascetic! If you think that is enough of a weapon to be used against us, then I will fight with you. I have come here
desiring a fight.' Having said this, desiring to kill the ascetic with his army, Dambhodbhava enveloped him from
all directions with a shower of arrows. Those terrible arrows were capable of piercing the bodies of others. But the
sage repulsed them all with his blades of grass. Then the unvanquished one released a blade of grass as a terrible
weapon. It was incapable of being countered and an extraordinary event took place. Through the power of maya,
the sage used that blade of grass to slice off the eyes, ears and noses of the soldiers. The king saw that the sky was
white with these blades of grass. He fell down at Nara's feet and prayed for salvation. Nara is a safe sanctuary for
those who desire it. He told the king who had sought refuge, 'Have the qualities of a brahmana. Have dharma in
your soul. And do not act in this way again. Overcome by insolence, do not ever insult anyone again, whether he is
inferior or superior. O king! That will ensure your supreme welfare. Obtain wisdom. Overcome avarice. Be without vanity. Have control over your soul. Be self-controlled and forgiving. Be gentle and peaceful. O king! Protect
your subjects. You have our leave to go. Be fortunate. Do not act in this way again. On our request, ask the brahmanas about their welfare.' Then the king bowed down before the feet of those great-souled ones. He returned to
his own city and accumulated a lot of dharma.

'"The deed accomplished by Nara in ancient times was great. But Narayana was superior to him because of his
many qualities. O king! Therefore, discard your vanity and go to Dhananjaya[Arjuna is identified with Nara and Krishna with Narayana.] before a weapon has been affixed
to Gandiva, the best of bows. He possesses Kakudika, Shuka, Naka, Akshisamtarjana, Santana, Nartana, Ghora
and Ajyamodaka as the eighth[These are the names of divine weapons, but beyond this, it is difficult to identify them. Kakudika has an etymology in 'hump' and was probably used against animals, while Shuka was named after a parrot. Naka means heaven.
Akshisamtarjana hurt the eye. Santana was a weapon that was shot continuously. Nartana made people dance.
Ghora means terrible, while Ajyamodaka was probably connected to Yama.]. All men who are pierced by these confront their death, or move around insane, or
lose their senses and become unconscious, or go to sleep, or jump around, or vomit, or urinate, or incessantly cry
and laugh. Partha's qualities are innumerable and Janardana is superior to him. You have known him as Kunti's
son, Dhananjaya. O great king! But know that Nara and Narayana are Arjuna and Keshava, brave warriors and
bulls among men. If you know this, do not harbour any suspicions about me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Be an arya in your resolution and make peace with the Pandavas. O best of the Bharata lineage! If you think it best
that there should not be any discord with you, strive for peace and do not set your mind on war. O best of the Kuru
lineage! Your lineage is extremely revered on earth. O fortunate one! Let it continue to be that way. Think about
what is best for you."'
