Vaishampayana said, 'Having seen them live there for an entire year, happy and unsuspecting, Purochana was extremely delighted. Witnessing Purochana's delight, Yudhishthira, Kunti's virtuous son, spoke to Bhimasena, Arjuna and the twins. "The cruel-hearted and evil Purochana thinks us to be trusting and has been deceived well. I
think the time has come for our escape. Let us escape, unobserved by anyone, after setting fire to the armoury,
burning Purochana to death and leaving six bodies here."

'O king! On the occasion of giving alms, Kunti fed a large number of Brahmanas in the night. A number of
women also came. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They enjoyed themselves and ate and drank as much as
they wished. When it was night, with Madhavi's[Kunti.] permission, they returned home. Driven by destiny and in
search of food, a hunter woman also happened to come to the feast, accompanied by her five sons. All of them
drank wine, until, with her sons, she was completely drunk. O ruler of men! She and her sons lost their senses and
slept in that house, as if dead. When everyone was asleep and a violent storm started in the night, Bhima started a
fire at the spot where Purochana was sleeping. The intense heat and great roar of the fire soon became manifest and
awoke a large number of the citizens. The citizens said, "Under Duryodhana's instructions, the evil-minded one[Purochana.]
built this house for his own destruction. Curse on Dhritarashtra, whose intelligence isn't impartial. He has burnt to
death Pandu's pure sons, as if they are his enemies. As fate would have it, that evil-hearted and evil-minded one[Purochana.]
has burnt those innocent and unsuspecting ones, supreme among men, and has himself been burnt." Thus did the
citizens of Varanavata mourn, as they stood around the house throughout that entire night.

'However, with their mother, the grieving Pandavas emerged through the tunnel and fled quickly, unobserved.
The scorchers of enemies, the Pandavas, could not move swiftly with their mother, because of fear and lack of
sleep. O lord of kings! Bhimasena, with great speed and power, then took up all his brothers and his mother. With
his great strength, the valorous one carried his mother on his shoulder, the twins on his hips and his brothers, the
two Parthas[Yudhishthira and Arjuna.],on his arms. He shattered the trees with force and pounded the earth with his feet. The energetic
Vrikodara rushed on, with the violence of a storm.'
