Vaishampayana said, 'After the births of these three sons, Kurujangala, Kurukshetra and the Kurus grew in prosperity. The land produced abundant crops and the harvests were plenty. The clouds showered down rain at the right
time. The trees yielded many flowers and fruit. The beasts of burden were happy and so were the animals and the
birds. The garlands were fragrant and the fruit was juicy. The cities were full of traders and artisans. The people
were brave, learned, honest and happy. There were no robbers and no one did anything that was against dharma. It
was as if in all the parts of the country, Krita Yuga[Krita Yuga or Satya Yuga, the first of the four yugas and a time when dharma was at its best. The incidents
of the Mahabharata occurred during Dvapara Yuga, the third of the yugas.] had arrived. The people were devoted to rites of dharma,
charity and performance of sacrifices. With love and affection for each other, the subjects grew in prosperity. They
were devoid of pride, anger and avarice. They helped each other in becoming prosperous and dharma reigned
supreme. The great city[Hastinapura.] was like the ocean. It was full of hundreds of palaces, with gates, arches and turrets
that looked like masses of clouds. It looked like Indra's great capital. The people happily enjoyed themselves in
rivers, wooded groves, lakes, ponds, hills and beautiful woods. Rivalling the northern Kurus, the southern Kurus
walked with siddhas, rishis and charanas. No one was wretched[The word used is kripana. It can also be translated as miserly.]. There was no woman who was a widow. The
Kurus increased the loveliness of the country manifold. They built wells, resting places, assemblies, tanks and residences for the Brahmanas. O king! Bhishma protected everything according to righteous conduct. The beautiful
country was dotted everywhere with sanctuaries and sacrificial stakes. The country expanded by bringing in other
kingdoms into its fold. Upheld by Bhishma, the wheel of dharma rolled on in the kingdom.

'All the inhabitants of the city and the country were always delighted on witnessing the accomplishments of the
great-souled princes and feasted. O king! In the houses of the chiefs of the Kurus and in those of the citizens, the
expressions "Let us give" and "Let us eat" were constantly heard.

'Right from their birth, Bhishma reared Dhritarashtra, Pandu and the immensely intelligent Vidura as if they
were his own sons. They went through rites, they studied and observed vows. When they attained youth, they became skilled in labour, exercise, archery, horsemanship, fighting with clubs, shields and swords, the science of elephants and the sacred texts of ethics. O lord! They studied history, the Puranas and many other branches of learning. They knew all the details of the Vedas, the Vedangas and their theory. The valorous Pandu excelled over all
other men in archery. O lord of the earth! Dhritarashtra was stronger than anyone else. O king! In the three worlds,
there was no one who was Vidura's equal in his eternal devotion to dharma. For him, dharma was the supreme
goal. On seeing that Shantanu's lineage had again been revived, a saying became common in the world and in all
the kingdoms. "Among mothers of heroes, the daughters of the king of Kashi; among all countries, Kurujangala;
among those who know everything about dharma, Bhishma; and among all cities, Gajasahrya[Hastinapura.]." However, because he was blind, Dhritarashtra did not obtain the kingdom. Nor by law, could Vidura[Because he was born of a Shudra woman.]. Therefore, Pandu became the lord of the earth.'
