Vaishampayana said, 'He saw the beautiful city, frequented by siddhas and charanas. It was full of sacred trees that
flower in every season. A fragrant breeze, mixed with the perfumes of sacred trees, intermingled with the sacred-
scented breeze and fanned him. He saw the divine grove of Nandana[The name of Indra's garden.], frequented by masses of apsaras, and the
celestial blossoming trees there welcomed him. This world of sacred deeds cannot be seen by those who have not
burnt themselves with austerities, or those who do not maintain fires[Sacrificial fires.], or those who have refrained from battle, or
those who do not perform sacrifices and follow falsehood, or those who have abandoned the sacred learning of the
Vedas, or those who have not bathed in the sacred waters of tirthas, or those who have been outside[Translated literally.] donating
gifts at sacrifices. The evil-minded ones who disrupt sacrifices, are mean, are addicted to drinking, violate their
preceptor's bed[That is, have intercourse with the preceptor's wife.], or eat meat, can never see it. Having seen the divine grove, resounding with celestial songs, the
mighty-armed one entered Shakra's beloved city. He saw thousands of divine vimanas that were capable of going
anywhere at will. They were stationed and he saw tens of thousands[Ayuta, meaning ten thousand. But ayuta can also mean a large number.] of them moving around. Pandava was
praised by gandharvas and apsaras and he was fanned by sacred winds, redolent with the scent of flowers. The
gods, gandharvas, siddhas and supreme rishis happily welcomed Partha, whose deeds were untiring. He was
blessed and praised, accompanied by the sound of divine instruments. The mighty-armed one advanced along the
starry path famous as suravithi[Suravithi literally means the road (vithi) of the gods (sura) and could be a reference to the Milky Way.], accompanied by the sound of conch-shells and drums. On Indra's command,
Partha travelled along it and was praised in every direction. The Sadhya, Vishvas[The Vishvadevas.], Maruts, Ashvins, Adityas, Va-
sus, Rudras, unblemished brahmarshis, many rajarshis, the kings led by Dilipa[King of the solar dynasty, often described as an ideal king.], Tumburu[The name of a gandharva.], Narada and the
gandharvas Haha and Huhu[The critical edition's text has Ahuhu. It should read Huhu.] were there. The descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.] showed homage to all of them in
the appropriate manner.

'Then the mighty-armed Partha descended from the supreme chariot and saw in person his father Shatakratu, the
god Indra, the destroyer of enemies and the chastiser of Paka, the king of the gods. A beautiful white umbrella with
a golden staff was held above his head. A divinely-scented fan was whisked. He was praised by Vishvavasu and
the other gandharvas and foremost brahmanas chanted from the Rig, Yajur and Sama Vedas. Approaching near, the
mighty Kounteya lowered his head and Shakra also embraced him with his round arms. He grasped him by the
hand and made him sit on Shakra's sacred throne, worshipped by the gods and the devarshis. When he was bowed
in obeisance, Indra of the gods, the slayer of enemy warriors, smelt his forehead and made him sit on his lap. At
the command of the god with the thousand eyes[Indra.], Partha, whose soul was immeasurable, sat on Shakra's throne
and appeared like a second Vasava[Vasava is Indra's name.]. Vritra's enemy[Indra killed a demon named Vritra.] affectionately touched Arjuna's handsome face with his
sacred and fragrant hands and pacified him. He gently caressed his long arms, hardened by the string of the bow
and as handsome as golden columns. The destroyer of Bala[Demon killed by Indra.] repeatedly caressed his arms with hands that were
marked from holding the vajra. The one with a thousand eyes kept looking at Gudakesha with a smile. The eyes of
Vritra's destroyer dilated with delight and were not satisfied. Seated on the same seat, they made the assembly hall
shine, like the sun and the moon rising in the sky on chaturdashi[The fourteenth day of the lunar fortnight. Though not explicitly stated, the reference is probably to the dark
lunar fortnight.].

'Headed by Tumburu, gandharvas, skilled in songs and chants, sang and chanted there and engaged in supreme
dancing. Ghritachi, Menaka, Rambha, Purvachitti, Svayamprabha, Urvashi, Mishrakeshi, Dundu, Gouri, Varuthini,
Gopali, Sahajanya, Kumbhayoni, Prajagara, Chitrasena, Chitralekha, Saha, Madhurasvara-these and other beautiful lotus-eyed ones danced there. They were engaged in captivating the minds of the siddhas. The sides of their
hips were wide and their breasts bounced. They stole the mind and the intelligence with their side-long glances,
gestures[Hava. Hava is not just any gesture, but a feminine coquettish gesture with amorous overtones.] and sweetness.'
