Vaishampayana said, 'When all the soldiers were asleep and were destroyed by the three rathas, King Yudhishthira
grieved and spoke these words to Dasharha. "O Krishna! All my sons were maharathas. Drona's son was wicked,
inferior and blemished in his deeds. How could they be slain by him? In a similar way, Drupada's sons were accomplished in the use of weapons. They were brave. They could fight with hundreds and thousands. How could
they have been brought down by Drona's son? Dhrishtadyumna was the best among rathas. In the forefront of the
battle, Drona, the great archer, could not stand before him. How could he have been slain? O bull among men!
What act had the preceptor's son accomplished, that he could single-handedly slay all of them in the camp?"

'Vasudeva replied, "There is no doubt that Drona's son had sought refuge with the god of the gods, the lord
without decay, the lord of everything. That is the reason he could slay many, though he was single-handed. If Mahadeva is pleased, he can even grant immortality. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I know about Mahadeva's
true nature and about the many deeds that he performed in ancient times. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
is the beginning, the middle and the end of beings. Everything in this entire universe moves because of his deeds.
The lord, the grandfather, wished to create beings and saw him first. He told him, 'Without any delay, create beings.' Having been thus addressed, the one with the tawny locks[Shiva.] saw that beings would have defects. For a very
long time, the immensely ascetic one submerged himself in water and tormented himself through austerities. The
grandfather waited for a very long period of time. So as to generate beings, he then created another being through
his mental powers. On seeing that Girisha was submerged in the water, this being told his father[Brahma.], 'I will generate
beings only if no other being has been born before me.' His father told him, 'There is no other being who has been
born before you. Sthanu is submerged in the water. You can confidently do what you have to do.' That being then
created seven Prajapatis, Daksha and the others[Prajapati means lord of beings and the Prajapatis were also creators of
beings. The number of Prajapatis varies, from one text to another.]. All of them created the four kinds of beings[Those born from wombs, eggs, sweat (worms/insects) and
plants/trees/herbs.]. Having been created, all the beings were hungry. O king! They violently rushed towards the Prajapatis, wishing to devour them. As
they were about to be devoured, in search of succour, they fled to the grandfather. 'O illustrious one! Please save
us from these. Decree some means for their sustenance.' He then assigned them the forests, the herbs and all immobile objects. Among mobile beings, the strong could feed on the weak. Having been assigned a means of sustenance, all the beings were satisfied and went away to wherever they had come from. O king! They cheerfully multiplied themselves, within their own species. When the beings prospered, the preceptor of the worlds[Brahma.] was
pleased. However, the eldest one arose from the waters and saw all these beings. He saw many different kinds of
beings, who were extending through their own energies. The illustrious Rudra angrily planted his linga, so that it
penetrated the earth and remained stationed there. Brahma wished to pacify him and spoke these words to him. 'O
Sharva! Why did you remain inside the water for such a long period of time? Why have you made your linga penetrate inside the earth?' Thus addressed, he angrily replied to the preceptor of the worlds, 'Someone else has created
these beings. What will I do with this[The linga.]? O grandfather! Through my austerities, I have created food for the beings.
The herbs will always multiply and so will the beings.' Having angrily spoken in this way, Bhava was cheerless
and went away. The immensely ascetic one tormented himself through austerities on the foothills of Mount Munjavat[Mount Munjavat probably had a lot of munja grass.]."'