Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing the king's words, which were in conformity with dharma and artha and ensured
welfare, Krishna[Droupadi.] was afflicted with grief. She spoke to Dasharha, who was seated there. King Drupada's daughter possessed long and black hair. She applauded the words of Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki. On seeing that
even Bhimasena spoke in favour of peace, she was extremely dejected. With tears in her eyes, the spirited one
spoke these words.

'"O Madhusudana! O mighty-armed one! You know about dharma. O Janardana! You know how the Pandavas
were deprived of their happiness through the deceit of Dhritarashtra's son and his advisers. You know about the
advice that the king secretly gave to Sanjaya. O Dasharha! You know what Yudhishthira told Sanjaya. You have
heard everything. 'O immensely radiant one[This is Yudhishthira's message to Dhritarashtra, being conveyed through Sanjaya.]! O father! O mighty-armed one! Give us five villages-Kushasthala,
Vrikasthala, Masandi, Varanavata and whichever other village you decide as the fifth and the last, for us to live in.'

O Keshava! Duryodhana and his advisers were to be addressed in these words. O Krishna! O Dasharha! Yudhishthira was modest and desired peace. But though he heard these words, Suyodhana did not comply[It is not clear how this refusal was communicated to the Pandavas.]. O
Krishna! If Suyodhana desires peace without returning the kingdom, there is no point in going there to strive for
peace. O mighty-armed one! Together with the Srinjayas, the Pandavas are capable of withstanding the terrible and
angry forces of Dhritarashtra's son. Our objectives are incapable of being obtained through conciliation and generosity. O Madhusudana! Therefore, you should not show any compassion towards them. O Krishna! If we wish to
save our lives, enemies who cannot be pacified through conciliation and generosity should be chastised through the
staff. O Achyuta! O mighty-armed one! Therefore, swiftly hurl a mighty staff at them, together with the Pandavas
and the Srinjayas. The Parthas are capable of doing this and it will bring you fame. O Krishna! Do what will bring
happiness to the kshatriyas. O Dasharha! If a kshatriya follows his own dharma, he should kill a kshatriya who has
become avaricious, and even a non-kshatriya. O father[The word used is tata.]! The only exception is a brahmana, even if he commits
every kind of sin. The brahmana is the preceptor of all the varnas and has precedence in everything. O Janardana!
Those who know dharma know that while it is a sin to kill someone who should not be killed, it is also a sin not to
kill someone who should be killed. O Krishna! O Dasharha! Act so that this sin does not touch you, together with
the Pandavas and the Srinjayas and their soldiers. O Janardana! Because of my faith, I will say what has often been
said earlier. O Keshava! Has there been a woman like me on earth? I am the daughter of King Drupada and have
arisen from the middle of a sacrificial altar. O Krishna! I am Dhrishtadyumna's sister and your beloved friend. I
have become a member of the Ajamidha lineage and am the daughter-in-law of the great-souled Pandu. I am wife
to the five sons of Pandu, who are like five Indras in their radiance. Through these five maharathas, I have given
birth to five brave sons. O Krishna! Under dharma, they bear the same relationship towards you that Abhimanyu
does. O Keshava! Such a woman was grabbed by the hair and was molested when she went to the assembly hall,
while the sons of Pandu looked on and you were still alive. While the Kouravas[In non-Critical versions, Pandavas is used here. Droupadi does mean the Pandavas. However, the Pandavas are
also Kouravas, because Kuru was a common ancestor.], the Panchalas and the Vrishnis
were alive, I was brought to the middle of the assembly hall and made a servant maid to those evil ones. The Pan-
dus looked at me, without any anger and without making any effort. O Govinda! I thought of you in my mind,
wishing that you might save me. The illustrious king, who is my father-in-law, told me, 'O Panchali! It is my view
that you deserve to have a boon. Ask for a boon.' I replied, 'Let the Pandavas, with their chariots and their
weapons, be freed from servitude.' O Keshava! They were freed at my words, but were sent to dwell in the forest.
O Janardana! You are aware of these and other hardships. O lotus-eyed one! Save me, along with my brothers, my
kin and my relatives. O Krishna! According to dharma, I am the daughter-in-law of both Bhishma and Dhritarashtra. Yet, I was forcibly made a slave. O Krishna! If Duryodhana remains alive for a single instant, shame on Bhimasena's strength, shame on Partha's skill with the bow. O Krishna! If you wish to show favours towards me, if
you are compassionate towards me, you should direct your entire wrath at Dhritarashtra's sons."

'Having said this, the black-eyed one with the beautiful hips used her left hand to gather the side of her hair. It
was soft and curled at the tips and was beautiful to see. It was extremely dark and was perfumed with sacred fragrances. It bore all the auspicious marks and shone like a giant snake. The lotus-eyed one approached Pundarikaksha with the gait of an elephant. Her eyes filled with tears, Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] told Krishna, "O Pundarikaksha! This was
grasped by Duhshasana. You should remember this at all times, when you seek to bring about a peace with the enemy. O Krishna! If Bhima and Arjuna are so mean as to desire peace, my aged father will fight, with his maharatha
sons. O Madhusudana! With Abhimanyu at the forefront, my five immensely valiant sons will also fight with the
Kurus. How can my heart have any peace until I see Duhshasana's dark hand severed and covered with dust? Thirteen years have passed, while I have waited. I have hidden my anger in my heart, like a kindled fire. My heart has
been pierced and oppressed by the stake of Bhima's words. The mighty-armed one can only see dharma now." Her
throat choked with tears, the long-eyed one spoke in this way. Krishna trembled and wept, her voice choked with
tears. Hot tears flowed down from the eyes of the one with the beautiful hips and moistened her large breasts.

'The mighty-armed Keshava comforted her. "O Krishna! You will soon see the women of the Bharata lineage
weep. O timid one! O beautiful one! They will weep as you are crying now, because their kin and relatives will be
slain, with their friends killed and their soldiers killed. Together with Bhima, Arjuna and the twins, I will act in accordance with Yudhishthira's instructions and according to what destiny has ordained. Cooked by destiny, if the
sons of Dhritarashtra do not listen to my words, they will be killed and will lie down on the ground, food for dogs
and jackals. The Himalaya mountains may move. The earth may shatter into a hundred fragments. The sky, with
all its nakshatras, may fall down. But my words will not be false. O Krishna! I am telling you this truthfully. Control your tears. With the enemies killed, you will soon see your husbands united with prosperity."'
