'Yudhishthira said, "O king! You are our lord. Command us as to what we should do. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! We have always desired to be established under your rule."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "O Ajatashatru! Be fortunate. Go in peace and safety. On my instructions, rule your kingdom with your riches. But bear in mind the instructions that I, an old man, am giving. I have reflected on this and it
is the supreme medication[Or diet or regimen, the word used being pathya.] for welfare. O Yudhishthira! O son! You know the subtle path of dharma. You are
humble, immensely wise and serve your superiors. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Where there is intelligence, there is peace. Therefore, tread the path of serenity. A weapon does not cut what is not wood. But it does
cut wood. Supreme men do not indulge in hostilities. They do not know enmity and see good qualities, leaving out
bad qualities. O Yudhishthira! It is only the worst among men who use harsh words in a quarrel. Those who are average reply to such words, but the supreme among men never respond. Supreme men never converse about ill
words, whether they are uttered or not uttered by inferior men[This is a repetition of what Arjuna has said.]. They only remember good deeds and not deeds
resulting from enmity. They only know the good because they have confidence in their own selves. In this assembly of good people, you have shown the character of an arya. O son! Do not take to your heart Duryodhana's
harshness. Look at your mother Gandhari and me. We crave for your good qualities. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Look at your old and blind father present before you. I wished to see my friends and judge the strengths
and weaknesses of my sons. It was from this desire that I had earlier allowed the gambling match to take place. O
king! There is no reason to feel sorry for the Kurus whom you rule. The intelligent Vidura, knowledgeable in all
the sacred texts, is your adviser. There is dharma in you, valour in Arjuna, strength in Bhimasena and respect and
service towards superior in the twins, foremost among men. O Ajatashatru! Be fortunate. Return to Khandavaprastha. Let there be fraternal love with your brothers[Meaning the Kouravas.]. May your mind always be established in dharma."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, supreme among those of the Bharata lineage, performed all the deeds that were appropriate for the occasion and left with his brothers. With Krishna[Droupadi.],
they left in chariots that were like the clouds. In a happy frame of mind, they left for Indraprastha, supreme among
cities.'
