Yudhishthira said, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You should tell me the truth about this. What
kinds of violence are said to be the equal to the sin of actually killing a brahmana?"

'Bhishma replied, "O Indra among kings! On an earlier occasion, I had invited Vyasa to tell me about this. I will
tell you the truth about this. Listen with single-minded attention.'O sage! O one who is fourth from Vasishtha[Fourth in line, the line being Vasishtha, Shakti, Parashara and Vedavyasa.]!
Tell me the truth about this. What kinds of violence are said to be equal to the sin of actually killing a brahmana?'

O  great king! Thus  asked, Parashara's  son  told me about the skilful and supreme determination of  dharma on
this.'There may be a brahmana who is lean because he lacks a means of subsistence. If a person himself invites
him for the sake of giving alms and later says that nothing is available, know that this person has effectively killed
a brahmana. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[This is actually Vedavyasa speaking to Bhishma. However, Bhishma can also be addressed as a descendant of
the Bharata lineage.]! If an evil-minded person is indifferent and destroys the livelihood of a brahmana who is devoted to learning, know that he is regarded as having killed a brahmana. O lord of
the earth! When cattle are thirsty and seek to slake their thirst, if a person causes obstructions in this, know him to
be guilty of killing a brahmana. The learned texts have been composed by the sages and these sacred texts have
been passed down properly. Without knowing them, if a person censures them, know him to be guilty of killing a
brahmana. If a person has a beautiful and excellent daughter, but does not bestow the maiden on a groom who is
her equal, know him to be guilty of killing a brahmana. If a stupid person is addicted to adharma and, through
falsehood, causes affliction and sorrow to brahmanas, know him to be guilty of killing a brahmana. If a person robs
all the possessions of someone who is blind, lame or dumb, know him to be guilty of killing a brahmana. Because
of delusion, if a person sets fire to a hermitage, a forest, a village or a city, know him to be guilty of killing a brahmana."'
