Vaishampayana said, 'Thus, the king[Dhritarashtra.] conversed with Sanatsujata and the intelligent Vidura and the night passed.
When the night had passed, all the kings entered the assembly hall and were delighted to see the suta[Sanjaya.]. With Dhritarashtra at the forefront, all of them went to the king's splendid assembly hall, desiring to hear the words the
Parthas had sent, in conformity with dharma and artha. The extensive arena was plastered white and was decorated
with gold. It was extremely beautiful, like the rays of the moon, and was sprinkled with excellent water. It was
strewn with beautiful seats made of gold, wood, stone and ivory, which were covered with excellent cushions.

'O bull among the Bharata lineage! Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Shalya, Kritavarma, Jayadratha, Ashvatthama,
Vikarna, Somadatta, Bahlika, the immensely wise Vidura, maharatha Yuyutsu-all these assembled together with
other royal warriors. Having placed Dhritarashtra at their head, they entered the splendid assembly hall. O king!
Duhshasana, Chitrasena, Shakuni Soubala, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Karna, Uluka and Vivimshati placed the intolerant Duryodhana, king of the Kurus, at their head and entered the assembly hall, like gods entering Shakra's abode.
O king! O king! When those brave ones, with arms like clubs, entered the assembly hall, it looked like a mountainous cavern full of lions. Having entered the assembly hall, those great archers, who adorned any gathering and
were as radiant as the sun, seated themselves on extremely expensive seats. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
When all the kings were seated, the gatekeeper informed them that the son of the suta had arrived. "Our messenger
has swiftly returned on the chariot, drawn by Saindhava horses that can bear loads well, from the Pandavas."

Wearing his earrings, he[Sanjaya.] quickly descended from the chariot and entered the assembly hall, which was full of
great-souled lords of the earth.

'Sanjaya said, "O Kouravas! Know that I have returned after having gone and met the Pandavas. Know that the
Pandavas salute all the Kurus, in accordance with their ages. They honour the elders according to age and those
who are of the same age as friends. According to age, they honour those who are their juniors. O lords of the earth!
On the instructions of Dhritarashtra, I earlier went from here to visit the Pandavas, and listen to what I have to
say."'
