'Narada said, "The brahmana and the bird descended on the summit of Rishabha. They saw the brahmana lady
Shandili practising austerities there. After Suparna had greeted her and Galava had worshipped her, she welcomed
them and they seated themselves on grass that had been spread out. They quickly ate the cooked food she offered,
consecrated with mantras. Having lost their senses because of this, they slept on the ground. After some time, Suparna woke up and wished to leave. The traveller in the sky saw that his wings had fallen off. The bird became like
a lump of flesh, with only a mouth and feet. On seeing him, Galava was distressed and asked, 'How have you
come to this state? What is the cause? How long will we have to remain here? Have we thought of something that
is evil and transgressed dharma? Surely this cannot have been the result of a small transgression on your part.' Suparna told the brahmana, 'O brahmana! I did entertain the thought of taking this Siddha to where Prajapati, the god
Mahadeva, the eternal Vishnu, Dharma and sacrifices reside, so that she might live there also. O illustrious goddess[Addressing Shandili.]! For my own good, I bow down before you. I harboured this thought in my mind and have certainly come
to grief because of this. But it was only out of great respect for you that I wished to do something like this.
Whether it was a good deed, or whether it was a bad deed, you should forgive me because of your greatness.' Thus
spoken to, she was placated.

'"She told the king of the birds and the bull among the brahmanas, 'O Suparna! Do not be afraid. You will possess beautiful wings again. O son! I have been slighted by you and I do not tolerate slights. Evil ones who slight
me will be dislodged from the superior worlds. I am devoid of any inauspicious marks. I am unblemished in every
way. I have achieved supreme success. Through good conduct, one obtains dharma. Through good conduct, one
obtains riches. Through good conduct, one obtains prosperity. Through good conduct, one destroys inauspicious
portents. O lord of the birds! May you have a long life. Go wherever you wish. Never censure a woman, even if
she deserves to be censured. You will possess strength and valour, as you did earlier.' His wings grew up again and
they were stronger than before. Having taken Shandili's leave, he left in the direction from where he had come.
But they did not come across horses of that description.

'"Vishvamitra was stationed along that road and saw Galava. The most eloquent of speakers told him in the
presence of Vinata's son, 'O brahmana! You have promised me of your own volition. The time has come to meet
that pledge. Do what you think is proper. Since I have waited this long, I will wait for a little more. O brahmana!
Determine a path to accomplish success.' Galava was extremely distressed and Suparna told him, 'I have myself
heard what Vishvamitra has told you. O best of brahmanas! O Galava! Let us go and consult together. Until you
have given your preceptor what you have promised in entirety, you cannot even sit down.'"'
