Vaishampayana said, 'The spectators, eyes wide with wonder, made way and Karna, the conqueror of enemy cities,
entered the large arena. He was clad in his natural coat of armour. His face was radiant with his earrings. His bow
was in his hand and his sword was tied[That is, tied to his waist.]. He entered like a walking mountain. That destroyer of enemy armies
was great in fame and wide of eyes. Karna was born from Pritha when she was a virgin, from a portion of the sun
whose rays are sharp. His strength, valour and prowess were like that of a lion, a bull, or a king of elephants. In radiance, beauty and splendour, he was like the sun, the moon and the fire. He was tall, like a golden palm tree. He
was a youth who could slay lions. Born from the sun, he was handsome and possessed countless qualities. The
mighty-armed one looked all around the arena. Perfunctorily, he bowed to Drona and Kripa. Everyone in that assembly remained stationary and gazed at him steadfastly. They were filled with great curiosity and asked each other who he was.

'Supreme among those who are eloquent, the sun's son addressed his unrecognized brother, the son of Paka's
punisher[Paka was a demon and Paka's punisher is Indra. Arjuna was Indra's son.], in a voice that was as deep as the roar of the clouds. "O Partha! Before the eyes of these people, I will
perform feats that will surpass everything that you have done. Don't be too amazed at what you have done." O
supreme among those who are eloquent! No sooner had he uttered these words, than the spectators quickly stood
up all at once, as if raised up by a single machine. O tiger among men! Duryodhana was greatly delighted. Bibhatsu was suddenly filled with anger and a sense of disgrace.

'With Drona's permission, Karna, always eager to do battle and immensely strong, exhibited all that Partha had
displayed before. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duryodhana and his brothers delightedly embraced Karna
and said, "O mighty-armed hero! Welcome. Good fortune has brought you here. You know how to humble pride. I
and the Kuru kingdom await your pleasure." Karna replied, "You have said it and that alone is enough. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I only desire your friendship. And I desire to have a duel with Partha." Duryodhana
replied, "O scourge of enemies! Enjoy all the pleasures with me. Do that which pleases your friends. Place your
feet on the heads of all your enemies." At that, Partha considered that he had been insulted. He told Karna, who
stood in the midst of the brothers like a mountain, "O Karna! When I have finished killing you, you will attain the
worlds set aside for unwelcome intruders and uninvited speakers." Karna replied, "O Phalguni! This arena is
meant for everyone and not for you alone. Dharma is that of strength and they are kings who are superior in valour.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Altercations are nothing but the resort of the weak. Why use it? Speak with
arrows, until my arrow carries off your head in your preceptor's presence." Partha, the conqueror of enemy cities,
was embraced by his brothers. With Drona's permission, he advanced to fight. Thereupon, Karna was embraced by
Duryodhana and his brothers. He picked up his bow and arrows and stood ready for battle.

'The sky was covered with thundering clouds, with lightning flashes in them. Indra's radiant and coloured bow
appeared[The rainbow is called Indra's bow.]. The clouds seemed to laugh because of white cranes flying. Seeing that Harihaya[Indra. There is a suggestion that is left implicit, but becomes a bit more explicit in the next sentence. Indra
was looking down fondly not on the arena in general, but on his son, Arjuna. And the sun especially dispersed the
clouds so as to favour his son, Karna.] was fondly looking down on the arena, the sun dispersed clouds that were above his son. Phalguni was invisible under the shadow
of the clouds. But Karna was clearly visible, because the sun had dispersed the clouds. Dhritarashtra's sons stood
next to Karna. Bharadvaja's son[Drona.], Kripa and Bhishma stood next to Partha. The assembly was divided into two
parties, including the women. Since she knew the truth, Kuntibhoja's daughter[Kunti.] fainted. Vidura, learned in all aspects of dharma, revived the unconscious Kunti by sprinkling water scented with sandalwood over her. When she
revived, she was struck with grief at the sight of her two sons clad in armour. But there was nothing she could do.

'When the two were ready and had raised their bows, Sharadvata Kripa, well versed in all aspects of dharma and
skilled in the rules of duels, said, "This son of Pandu is Kunti's youngest son. He is a Kuru and will fight a duel
with you. O mighty-armed hero! You should also tell us your mother, father and lineage and the royal dynasty of
which you are the ornament. On knowing this, Partha will fight with you. Or he may not fight[Because the sons of kings do not fight with those who are of an inferior lineage.]." At these words,
Karna's face was flushed with shame. It looked as if a lotus had been faded and torn by showers of rain. Duryodhana said, "O preceptor! It is stated in the sacred texts that there are three ways to become a king-through noble
birth, through valour and through leading an army. If Phalguni is unwilling to fight with someone who is not a
king, I install him[Karna.] as king in the land of Anga." At that instant, the immensely powerful and fortunate maharatha
Karna was instated in the kingdom of Anga, with roasted grains of rice, flowers, golden water pots and ritual
chanting by those who knew the mantras. He was seated on a golden seat, an umbrella was held above him and
whisks[With the umbrella, this forms the royal insignia and these whisks were usually made out of yak tails.] were waved at his side.

'When the cries of "Victory" had died down, the bull among kings told the Kourava[Duryodhana.], "What can I give you
that is comparable to your gift of this kingdom? O king! O tiger among kings! Tell me and I will do your bidding."

Suyodhana[Duryodhana's name.] replied, "I wish for your eternal friendship." Having been thus addressed, Karna said, "So shall it
be." Thereupon, they embraced each other in joy and were immensely happy.'
