Souti said, 'Carried by Suparna, they soon came to an island. It was surrounded by the waters of the ocean and
echoed with the songs of birds. There were myriad fruits and flowers in the woods that were there. There were
beautiful houses and lakes with lotuses. It was adorned with charming lakes that were full of clear water. It was refreshed with pure winds that carried with them divine fragrances. It was radiant with trees that grow on the Malaya
mountains[The Malaya mountains are in south India, adjoining Malabar. The Malaya mountains had several sandalwood
trees. Thus, an alternative translation is that the island had many sandalwood trees, since malaya also means a sandalwood tree.]. They rose high up in the sky and stirred by the breeze, showered down flowers. It was as if the trees
bathed the nagas who lived there with rain in the form of flowers. It was a charming, pleasant and divine place,
dear to the gandharvas and the apsaras. Echoing with the sweet melodies of many birds, it delighted Kadru's sons.

'Having arrived in those woods, the pannagas[Synonym for nagas.] enjoyed themselves there. Then they told the immensely valorous Suparna, supreme among birds, "Take us to another beautiful island that has large quantities of water. O bird!
You must have seen many enchanting countries when travelling through the sky." Having thought about this, the
bird asked his mother Vinata, "O mother! Why must I do what the serpents ask me to?" Vinata replied, "O
supreme among birds! I have become the slave of my ignoble sister. The serpents deceived me and made me lose a
wager." When his mother told him the reason, the one who travels in the sky[Garuda.] grieved.

'He told the serpents, "O serpents! What can I get you? What can I find out for you? What feat of power can I
perform? Tell me truly how one can be freed from this state of slavery." Having heard the bird, the serpents asked
him to use his energy to bring the amrita[Amrita is nectar or ambrosia and was produced when the ocean was churned.]. That was the way to be freed from slavery.'
