'Sanjaya said, "O king! The mighty-armed Satyaki, invincible in battle, drew a supreme bow, capable of withstanding a great burden, in that battle. He discharged many tufted arrows that were like virulent serpents. He displayed the deep, light and wonderful dexterity of his hands. He drew the bow, affixed arrows to it, discharged them
and affixed others so swiftly that he seemed to be like a beautiful cloud that was showering down rain. He killed
the enemies in that battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Duryodhana saw that he was blazing and
despatched ten thousand chariots against him. But valiant Satyaki, for whom truth was valour, was a great and
supreme archer. He used divine weapons to slay all of them. Having accomplished this terrible deed, he grasped
his bow and confronted Bhurishrava, the extender of the deeds of the Kuru lineage, in that battle. On seeing that
the soldiers had been brought down by Yuyudhana, he[Bhurishrava.] angrily attacked him. He stretched an extremely large
bow that had the complexion of Indra's weapon[Indra's weapon is the rainbow.]. O great king! He displayed the dexterity of his hands and released thousands of arrows that were as virulent as serpents and were like the vajra. O king! These arrows were
like the touch of death to Satyaki's followers and they fled, leaving the invincible Satyaki alone in that fight.

'"On seeing this, Yuyudhana's ten sons advanced against Bhurishrava, the great archer, in that battle. They were
maharathas and immensely strong. They were clad in excellent armour and bore many different kinds of weapons
and standards. All of them were extremely angry in that great battle and spoke to the one who had the mark of a
sacrificial stake on his standard[Bhurishrava had a sacrificial stake on his standard.]. 'O immensely strong one! O relative of the Kouravas[Bhurishrava was the son of Somadatta and Somadatta was descended from Pratipa, who was also the ancestor
of the Pandavas and the Kouravas.]! Come and fight with
us, either singly, or together. You will obtain great fame if you vanquish us in battle. Or we will vanquish you in
battle and obtain great satisfaction.' Thus addressed, the immensely strong and brave one, who was foremost
among men and prided himself on his valour, saw them stationed there and replied, 'O brave ones! You have spoken well. If that is your desire, fight with me now. I will endeavour to kill all of you in battle.' Having been thus
addressed, the brave ones who were swift in action showered the great archer, the destroyer of enemies, with arrows. O great king! That tumultuous encounter commenced when it was afternoon. In that field of battle, there was
a single one on one side and many united ones on the other. They enveloped that single-handed and foremost warrior with arrows. O king! It was like clouds showering down on a giant mountain. When unleashed, that shower of
arrows was like Yama's staff, or like the vajra. But before they could reach him, the maharatha swiftly sliced them
down. We then beheld the extraordinary valour of Somadatta's son. He single-handedly fought with many, without
any fear. O king! The ten maharathas created a shower of arrows. They surrounded the mighty-armed one, wishing
to kill him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! In that battle, Somadatta's son used ten arrows to angrily
slice down their bows. O king! When their bows had been sliced down, in that encounter, the maharatha instantly
used sharp, straight-tufted and broad-headed arrows to slice off their heads. Thus slain, they fell down on the
ground, like trees struck by lightning.

'"O king! On seeing that his brave and immensely strong sons had been killed in battle, Varshneya[Satyaki.] roared
and attacked Bhurishrava. In that battle, chariot dashed against chariot and the two immensely strong ones oppressed each other. In that encounter, they slew the horses of each other's chariot. Deprived of their chariots, the
maharathas jumped down on the ground. They grasped great swords and supreme shields and attacked each other.
As they were stationed for battle, those tigers among men were dazzling. Satyaki was wielding a supreme sword.
O king! But Bhimasena swiftly approached him and took him up on his chariot. O king! And while all the archers
looked on in that battle, your son picked up Bhurishrava on his chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! While
that battle raged on, the angry Pandava began to fight with maharatha Bhishma. When the sun had assumed a reddish tinge, Dhananjaya swiftly killed twenty-five thousand maharathas. They had been instructed by Duryodhana
to slay Partha. But they approached him and met their destruction, like insects before a flame. At this, the Matsyas
and the Kekayas, skilled in the knowledge of fighting, surrounded maharatha Partha and his son. At that moment,
the sun disappeared and all the soldiers were overcome with confusion. O great king! It was evening and with his
mounts exhausted, your father, Devavrata, instructed that the soldiers should withdraw. Having encountered each
other, the Pandava and Kuru troops were filled with great fear and anxiously retired to their camps. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Having retired to their own camps, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, and the Kurus, rested,
as was appropriate."'
