'Lomasha said, "Then the wielder of the vajra, protected by the strength of the gods, attacked Vritra, who had then
covered heaven and earth[The text uses the word rodasi and rodasi (or rodas) means heaven and earth.]. He was protected on all sides by the gigantic Kalakeyas. With their upraised
weapons, they looked like mountains with peaks. O best of the Bharata lineage! In an instant, a great battle, terrorising the worlds, began between the gods and the danavas. Upraised swords clashed, wielded by the arms of warriors and directed at each other's bodies, creating a great sound. O lord of the earth! Heads descended from the sky
onto the ground and looked like palm fruit loosened from their stalks. Clad in golden armour and armed with
maces, the Kaleyas[The Kalakeyas are also known as the Kaleyas.] rushed at the thirty gods, like mountains on fire. Unable to withstand the force of this onslaught, the thirty gods broke their ranks and fled in fear. On seeing them fly in fear and Vritra increasing in power,
the thousand-eyed Purandara was greatly overcome by fear. On seeing Shakra afflicted with fear, the eternal Vishnu increased his strength by giving him a share of his own energy. Having seen Shakra thus protected by Vishnu,
all the masses of gods and the unblemished brahmarshis gave him their own energy. Thus empowered by Vishnu,
the gods and the immensely fortunate rishis, Shakra increased in strength. On knowing that the lord of the thirty
gods had been strengthened, Vritra let out giant roars. The earth, the directions, the sky, heaven and all the mountains began to tremble at this roar.

'"On hearing that terrible and great roar, the great Indra was struck with extreme grief. O king! Immersed in
fear, he swiftly unleashed the great vajra, so as to kill him. Struck by Shakra's vajra, the giant asura, wearing a
golden garland, fell down, like the giant mountain Mandara in ancient times, when released from Vishnu's
hand[This seems to be a reference to the churning of the ocean, when Mount Mandara was the churning rod and
was supported at the base by Vishnu in the form of a turtle (kurma). However, the use of the word 'hand' remains
unclear.]. The supreme daitya was killed. But out of fear, Shakra fled and sought refuge in a lake[In some versions of the Vritra story, Vritra was a brahmana. Though Vritra had been killed, Indra might
have been scared because he had killed a brahmana, other than the obvious reason of his not believing that Vritra
was truly dead.]. In his fear, he
refused to believe that his hand had released the vajra. In his fear, he refused to believe that Vritra was dead. All
the gods were happy and delighted. The maharshis chanted Indra's praises. The gods assembled together and swiftly began to kill all the daityas, who were tormented at Vritra's death. They were killed by the thirty gods. In their
fear, they entered the waves of the ocean and the infinite depths of the ocean, frequented by large fishes and full of
gems. There they plotted and conspired about the destruction of the three worlds. Some smiled. Others were wise
in suggesting courses of action, each according to his inclination. In due course of time, they arrived at the terrible
decision that the first act should be to destroy all virtuous and learned ones and those who were ascetics. 'All the
worlds are supported by austerities. Therefore, austerities must swiftly be destroyed. Whatever virtuous ones exist
on earth, ascetics, knowledgeable in dharma and wise, their slaughter must swiftly be ensured. When they are destroyed, the world will be destroyed.' Having thus arrived at this decision of destroying the world, all of them were
extremely happy. Varuna's abode was full of jewels. They made it their citadel, among the giant waves."'
