Souti said, 'Then Vasuki told the rishi Jaratkaru, "This maiden has the same name as yours. She is my sister and is
an ascetic. O best of the Brahmanas! I shall support her. O one blessed with the power of austerities! I shall protect
her with all my might." When the snake made the promise that he would maintain his sister, Jaratkaru went to the
snake's house.

'Thereupon, the aged sage of great vows, best among ascetics, devoted to dharma and learned in mantras, accepted her hand in accordance with the prescribed rites. Worshipped by maharshis, he went with his wife to a
beautiful house built by the king of snakes. In that house, there was a beautiful bed covered with unmatched
spreads and Jaratkaru slept there with his wife. At that time, the supreme one made an agreement with his wife.

"Never do anything or say anything that causes me displeasure. If you ever cause me displeasure, I shall leave you
and no longer live in this house. Please remember these words I have spoken." In great anxiety and great sorrow,
the sister of the king of snakes agreed. Wishing to bring pleasure to her husband, the fortunate one served her
melancholy husband with the dedication of a white crow[Shvetakakiya. This is an unhappy translation, though white crow is right. However, the sense is that the dedication has the watchfulness of a dog, the timidity of a deer and the instinct of a crow.].

'One day, at the time of her season, Vasuki's sister bathed and following the norms, slept with her husband, the
great hermit. She then conceived a child who was like the fire, blessed with the power of austerities and radiant
like the god of fire himself. Like the moon in the bright lunar fortnight, the child grew in her womb.

'A few days later, the immensely famous Jaratkaru fell asleep with his head in his wife's lap, like a tired person.
When the best of Brahmanas was thus sleeping, the setting sun entered the peaks of the mountains. O Brahmana!
Vasuki's excellent sister was frightened at the possible loss of dharma, because the day was coming to an end.

"What shall I do now? Should I wake my husband or should I not? He leads a hard life and is devoted to dharma.
How can I act so as not to cause him offence? On one side is his anger. On the other, since he lives by dharma,
there is the loss of dharma. It seems to me that the loss of dharma is the greater evil. If I wake him, he will certainly be angry. But if the time for evening prayers passes, he will certainly lose dharma." Having thought this over in
her mind, the snake Jaratkaru[Vasuki's sister.] spoke in a sweet voice to the rishi, asleep like a fire, blazing in his austerities. "O
greatly illustrious one! Wake up, the sun is setting. O illustrious one! O one who is rigid in his vows! Touch the
water and perform the evening prayers. The fearful and beautiful moment for agnihotra[Agnihotra is a sacrificial fire. The text means that the time for making offerings to the sacrificial fire has
arrived.] has arrived. O lord!
Dusk is gradually spreading over the western direction." Having been thus addressed, the illustrious and great ascetic Jaratkaru told his wife, his lips quivering in anger, "O snake! You have insulted me. I shall no longer live
with you. I will go away to the place from where I had come. O lady with the beautiful thighs! If I am asleep, I
know for certain that the sun does not have the power to set. No one likes to stay in a place where he has been insulted, let alone those who are like me and are devoted to dharma like me." Thus addressed by her husband,
Jaratkaru's heart began to tremble.

'Vasuki's sister told him, "O Brahmana! I did not wake you with a desire to insult you. I did it so that you should
not face a loss in dharma." But the powerful ascetic Jaratkaru had made up his mind to abandon his wife. Addressed by his wife, the rishi angrily told the snake, "O snake! I have never uttered a lie. Therefore, I have to go. O
beautiful one! That was the agreement I had earlier made with you and your brother. O fortunate one! I have
passed my time happily with you. O timid one! When I am gone, tell your brother that the illustrious one has left.
And when I have departed, please do not grieve for me." Having been thus addressed, the beautiful Jaratkaru was
filled with anxiety and sorrow. Her mouth was dry. Her eyes were full of tears. Her voice choked with sobs. Her
heart trembled. But steadying herself, the beautiful one then told her husband Jaratkaru with joined palms, "O you
who follow the path of dharma! It is not proper for you to forsake me in this fashion. I am innocent. You are established in dharma. But I am also always established in dharma, doing that which brings you pleasure. O best of
Brahmanas! I have not yet accomplished the purpose for which I was given to you. I am unfortunate. What will
Vasuki tell me? O supreme one! To save themselves from their mother's curse, my relatives wanted a son born
from me through you. But he is not yet visible. The welfare of my relatives depends on a son obtained through
you. O Brahmana! I plead with you that you should not go away until I am fertile through our union and can bring
about the welfare of my lineage. O supreme one! Why should a great-souled one like you abandon an innocent one
when the conception is still not apparent?" Thus addressed, the hermit Jaratkaru, blessed with the power of austerities, told his wife words that were fit and appropriate for the occasion. "O fortunate one! The one who is in your
womb now will be a rishi who will be like the god of fire himself. He will be the best of those who follow dharma
and will be learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas." Having said this, the virtuous and great rishi Jaratkaru went
away. His heart was once again firmly fixed on the practice of great austerities.'
