'"The mother said, 'Confronting any calamity, the king should never be afraid. Even if his heart is shattered, he
should not exhibit this fear. On seeing that a king is frightened, everyone is scared. The kingdom, the soldiers and
the advisers become divided in their views. Some may seek refuge with the enemy, others may desert the king.
Others who have been slighted earlier may try to strike back. Though powerless, only extreme well-wishers remain
with him, desiring salvation, like a cow whose calf has been tethered. They sorrow over his sorrow, as if over relatives who have died. Even those who were honoured before and those who were regarded as well-wishers, covet
the kingdom of a king who has confronted a hardship. Do not be frightened. Otherwise, your well-wishers will
desert you in their fear. I have said all this to you, questioning your power, manliness and intelligence. I have attempted to incite you, like a strong person behaving towards a weaker one. O Sanjaya! If you have understood
everything that I have said, then arise. Be peaceful in your mind and strive for victory. We possess a large treasury
that is not known to you. No one except I knows about this and I will give this to you. O Sanjaya! You still possess
many hundreds of well-wishers. O brave one! They will accompany you, in happiness and unhappiness. They will
not retreat and each is worth one hundred. These are appropriate allies for a man who wishes to obtain what he
wants. They are advisers who are destroyers of the enemy.'

'"The son replied, 'Even if one hears such words, colourful, meaningful and with purport and rhythm, from a
person with limited intelligence, how can one not cast away the darkness? With you, one who can see the past and
the future, as my leader, I will shoulder this burden, even if it is in the water and is ebbing away. Because I wished
to hear every word from you, I have generally been silent, but for contradicting you once in a while, like one who
is not satisfied with amrita obtained from a relative at the time of a hardship. I will now endeavour to destroy the
enemy and accomplish victory.'"

'Kunti said, "He was incited like an excellent horse, prodded by the arrows of her words. He carried out all her
instructions, exactly as she had said. These words inspire terror. They are supreme in increasing energy. When a
king is exhausted from the depredations of an enemy, an adviser should recount them. This history is known as
'Jaya[Jaya means victory.]'. It should be heard by one who wishes for victory. Having heard it, he will swiftly conquer the earth and
oppress the enemies. This[The account.] leads to the birth of a son. This leads to the birth of a brave son. If a pregnant woman
repeatedly hears it, she is certain to give birth to a warrior who will be learned, valiant, austere, brave, self-controlled and an ascetic, radiant with the prosperity of brahmanas, honoured in the words of the virtuous, resplendent,
strong, immensely fortunate, a maharatha, daring, unassailable, victorious and invincible. He will chastise those
who are evil and protect those who act in accordance with dharma. The kshatriya lady will give birth to such a
brave son, for whom his truth will be his valour."'
