'Sanjaya said, "He passed through that array of rathas, like the sun through darkness. The preceptor poured down
arrows on him and obstructed him with a shower of arrows. He seemed to drink up that torrent of arrows released
from Drona's bow, as if through maya. He attacked the brothers[Duryodhana's brothers.] and confounded them with his strength. In that
battle, those supreme archers were urged to adopt the greatest force by your sons and surrounded him from all
sides. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus surrounded, Bhima laughed. He raised a terrible
club, and roaring like a lion, hurled it at them. The powerful one released it with force and it crushed them. It was
as if Indra's vajra had been hurled by Indra and struck them firmly. O king! Its loud noise seemed to fill up the
earth. Its terrible and flaming energy frightened your sons. On seeing that it was descending with great force, covered in energy, all those on your side fled, roaring in lamentation. O venerable one! Its sound was impossible to
tolerate. Many men fell down where they stood and so did rathas on chariots. Kounteya, unassailable to enemies,
drove them away in that encounter. His force against that army was like that of Suparna[Garuda.], the king of the birds.
Such was the action of that leader of leaders of rathas.

'"O great king! Bharadvaja's son attacked Bhimasena. In that battle, Drona checked Bhima with his arrows and
suddenly emitted a loud roar, terrifying the Pandus. O great king! An extremely terrible battle commenced between
Drona and the great-souled Bhima, like that between the gods and the asuras. Sharp arrows were released from
Drona's bow and in that encounter, these slew brave ones in hundreds and thousands. Pandava descended from his
chariot with great force. O king! He closed his eyes and attacked Drona on foot, like a bull receiving rain with
ease. Thus did Bhima, tiger among men, receive that shower of arrows. The immensely strong one grasped the
pole[Of Drona's chariot.] with his hands and hurled it. O king! Drona was quickly thrown down by Bhima in that battle. He mounted another chariot and stationed himself at the mouth of the vyuha. At that time, his charioteer quickly urged the
horses. O Kouravya! Bhimasena's act was extraordinary. The immensely strong Bhimasena mounted his own chariot and powerfully attacked your son's army. He crushed the kshatriyas, like a gale uprooting trees. He advanced
against the enemy soldiers like a mountain against the force of the waters. He encountered the army of the Bhojas,
protected by Hardikya. O king! Bhimasena crushed it in many ways and advanced. O venerable one! He frightened
the enemy soldiers by slapping his palms. He could not be defeated by any of those soldiers, like a tiger by a herd
of bulls. He passed through the army of Bhojas and also through the army of Kambojas, large numbers of mlecchas and many others who were skilled in fighting.

'"He then saw Satyaki, the bull among men, fighting. On his chariot, Kounteya went there with great force. O
great king! Bhimasena wished to see Dhananjaya. In that battle, the descendant of the Pandu lineage passed
through all your warriors. He then saw Arjuna, bull among men, fighting there bravely. The valiant one was striving for Saindhava's death. Having seen Arjuna there, he let out a mighty roar. O Kouravya! That mighty roar was
heard by Partha. Partha[Arjuna.] also let out a mighty roar and so did Madhava. O great king! They attacked like bulls.
Wishing to see Vrikodara and hearing the roar of the wind god's son, Vasudeva and Arjuna repeatedly roared. O
great king! Having heard Bhimasena's roar and that of the archer Phalguna, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, rejoiced.
On hearing those loud roars, the king's sorrow was dispelled. The lord became assured about Dhananjaya's victory
in the battle. While Bhimasena, fierce in battle, was roaring, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira, Dharma's son,
smiled.

'"In his heart and in his mind, the supreme among upholders of dharma said the following. 'O Bhima! You have
sent me a message and have followed the words of your superior. O Pandava! Someone who is your enemy can
never be victorious in a battle. It is through good fortune that Savyasachi Dhananjaya is alive in the battle. It is
through good fortune that the brave Satyaki, for whom truth is his valour, is well. It is through good fortune that I
have heard the roars of Vasudeva and Dhananjaya. It is through good fortune that Phalguna is alive in this battle,
having slain the enemies. He defeated Shakra in an encounter and satisfied the fire god[This is a reference to the burning of the Khandava forest, described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. All of us are alive because of the strength of his arms. It is through good fortune that Phalguna has killed the enemy soldiers and is
alive. On a single chariot, he vanquished the nivatakavachas, who were extremely difficult for the gods to
defeat[This incident has been described in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. It is through good fortune that Partha is alive. When all the Kouravas assembled to seize the cattle in
the capital of Matsya, he defeated them[This has been described in Section 47 (Volume 4).]. It is through good fortune that Partha is alive. Through the valour of
his arms, he killed fourteen thousand kalakeyas in a great battle[This incident has been descrbed in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. It is through good fortune that Partha is alive.
When the powerful king of the gandharvas captured Duryodhana, he defeated him through the valour of his
arms[This incident has been described in Section 39 (Volume 3).]. It is through good fortune that Partha is alive. He wears a diadem and garlands. He is powerful and possesses white horses. Krishna is his charioteer. He has always been dear to me. It is through good fortune that Phal-
guna is alive. Tormented by sorrow over his son, he wished to perform an extremely difficult deed. Wishing to kill
Jayadratha, he undertook a pledge. Will Dhananjaya be able to kill Saindhava in the battle? Protected by Vasudeva,
will he be able to fulfil his promise? Will I meet Arjuna before the sun has set? Saindhava has always been engaged in ensuring King Duryodhana's welfare. Will he be brought down by Phalguna and delight his enemies?
Will King Duryodhana be brought down by Phalguna? Having seen Saindhava in the battle[That is, seen Saindhava slain in the battle.], will his mind turn
towards peace? Having seen his brothers killed by Bhimasena in the battle, will the wicked Duryodhana's mind
turn towards peace? Having seen many other warriors brought down on the face of the earth, will the wicked
Duryodhana suffer from repentance? Will we not obtain peace because of Bhishma alone? Will Suyodhana not
have peace to preserve what is left?' O king! He thought about many such things. He was overcome by compassion. However, the terrible battle continued."'
