The sages said, 'O son of a suta! We wish to hear from you all about the place Samantapanchaka[A very holy region, identified with the area around Kurukshetra.], described as it
really is.'

Souti said, 'O Brahmanas! As per your wishes, listen to the blessed words about Samantapanchaka as I tell
them. For listening to these accounts, you are the best of men. At the juncture of treta and dvapara[Two of the four yugas or eras, the four being satya (krita), treta, dvapara and kali.], angered at
sins committed, the greatest of those who ever bore arms, Rama[Reference is to Parashurama.], repeatedly decimated the world of all Kshatriyas. Having destroyed all Kshatriyas through his own prowess, lustrous like fire, he created five lakes of blood in
Samantapanchaka. We have heard that, beyond his senses with anger, he stood in the bloody waters of those lakes
and rendered bloody offerings to his ancestors. Then Richika[Parashurama's paternal grandfather.] and his other ancestors appeared before this bull
among Brahmanas and said, "Calm down, refrain, be pacified." From that day, the region in the neighbourhood of
those five bloody lakes has become famous as the holy land of Samantapanchaka. The wise men have said that
every place should have a name that signifies something that made the place famous. At the end of dvapara and the
beginning of kali, a great battle was fought between the armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas at this holy Samantapanchaka. In that holy land, free from any bad qualities of the earth, eighteen akshouhinis of soldiers eagerly assembled for battle. O Brahmanas! Thus it was that the name of the region came about. I have described to you that
beautiful and holy place. O best of Brahmanas! I have told you everything about this place, a region famous in the
three worlds.'

The sages said, 'O son of a suta! We wish to hear everything about the akshouhini that you mentioned to us. You
know everything. Tell us exactly the size of an akshouhini, with foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants.'

Souti said, 'One chariot, one elephant, five foot soldiers and three horses make up a patti. Three pattis are
known as a senamukha and three senamukhas make up a gulma. Three gulmas are named a gana and three ganas a
vahini. The wise know that three vahinis collectively form a pritana. Three pritanas make a chamu, three chamus
an anikini and the wise say that ten times an anikini is known as an akshouhini. O best of Brahmanas! Those who
know arithmetic have calculated that there are 21,870 chariots in an akshouhini and the number of elephants is the
same. Know that the number of foot soldiers is 109,350 and the number of horses is 65,610. O best of Brahmanas!
I have described to you in detail that which those who are familiar with numbers call an akshouhini. O best of
Brahmanas! The eighteen akshouhinis of the Kurus and the Pandavas were made up according to these numbers
and the cause destroyed them all. Time brought them together in this region and making the Kouravas the cause,
destroyed them all. Bhishma, skilled in the best weapons, fought for ten days. Drona defended the Kuru army for
five days. Karna, the decimator of enemy soldiers, fought for two days, Shalya for half a day and the duel of the
clubs for also that duration. At the end of that day, the son of Drona[Ashvatthama.], Hardikya[Kritavarma.] and Goutama[Kripacharya.] killed Yudhishthira's soldiers when they were sleeping unsuspectingly. I will tell you in detail the story that was narrated at the sacrifice of Shounaka, the Bharata story, beginning with the story of Poulama, which contains wonderful meanings,
verses and accounts and is adorned in many ways. It is accepted by the wise the way men who desire final release
accept renunciation, as the atman[The supreme soul, the brahman or the paramatman.] is among objects to be known and life among things that are dear. It is the chief
among all histories and the best among all sacred texts. This supreme of histories incorporates the supreme of intelligence and vowels, consonants and words, vulgate and learned. Hear the outline of different parvas of Bharata
history, with subtle meanings and wondrous lines.

'The first is called Anukramanika (1)[These numbers are not part of the text. They have been added so that the reader can get a better sense of the
one hundred books.]; the second Parvasangraha (2); then come Poushya (3), Poulama (4),
Astika (5) and the descent of the first generation (6); then come the parvas composed by the gods-Sambhava (7),
Jatugriha Daha (8)[The burning of the house of lac.], Hidimba (9); then Baka Vadha[The killing of Baka.] (10) and then Chaitraratha (11); then the parva known as
svayamvara of the divine Panchali (12)[Droupadi.]; then, after defeating rivals in accordance with the dharma of Kshatriyas
(13), Vaivahika (14)[The wedding.], Viduragamana[The arrival of Vidura.] and Rajya-labha (15)[Winning of the kingdom.]; then Arjuna Vanavasa (16)[Arjuna's sojourn in the forest.], Subhadra Harana
(17)[The abduction of Subhadra.] and Harana Harika (18); then Khandava Daha (19)[The burning of Khandava forest.], where Maya is met; after that, it is known as Sabha
Parva (20)[Assembly hall.] and after that, Mantra Parva (21)[When the council meets.]; then Jarasandha Vadha (22)[The killing of Jarasandha.] and Digvijaya (23)[Conquest.] and after
that comes the parva known as Rajasuya (24)[Royal sacrifice.]; then Arghabhirana (25)[Offerings or gifts.], Shishupala Vadha (26)[The slaying of Shishupala.] and then
Dyuta (27)[The game of dice.]; and then known as the Anudyuta (28)[The sequel to the game of dice.]; then the parva known as Aranyaka (29)[Characterizing the forest.] and Kirmira
Vadha (30)[The slaying of Kirmira.]; then the parva known as Kairata (31), which features the bout between Ishvara[Shiva.] and Arjuna; then
the parva known as Indraloka Abhigamana (32)[The travel to the world of Indra.]; then the wise king of Kuru's pilgrimage in Tirthayatra (33);
then Jatasura Vadha (34)[The killing of Jatasura.] and Yaksha Yuddha (35)[War of the yakshas.]; and the one after that is known as Ajagara (36)[Boa constrictor.]; then the
parva known as Markandeya Samasya (37)[Named after a sage known as Markandeya.]; and then the parva that has the dialogue between Droupadi and
Satyabhama (38); then the parvas known as Ghoshayatra (39)[Travel with the cattle.], Mrigasvapna (40)[Dream of the deer.]and after that the story
known as the measurement of rice (41); then Droupadi Harana (42)[The abduction of Droupadi.] by Saindhava[Jarasandha.] from the forest; then comes
the parva known as Kundala Harana (43)[The theft of the earrings.], then Araneya (44)[Arani is a wood or stick used for kindling a sacred fire and this parva is named after that.] and after that the parva known as Virata (45)[Virata was the king of the Matsya kingdom and the Pandavas lived there in exile.];
then the parva known as Kichaka Vadha (46)[The slaying of Kichaka.]; then the parva known as Gograhana (47)[The stealing of cattle.]; then the parva that
tells of the wedding between Abhimanyu and the daughter of the king of Virata (48); the next parva is known as
Udyoga (49)[Endeavour.] and after that the parva is known as Sanjaya Yana (50)[The arrival of Sanjaya.]; the next parva, concerning the worries of
Dhritarashtra, is known as Prajagara (51)[Sleeplessness at night.]; then Sanatsujata Parva (52) with secret spiritual philosophy; then
Yanasandhi (53)[An arrival in search of peace.] and the arrival of Bhagavana (54)[Krishna.]; then it is known comes the quarrel of the great Karna (55)
and Niryanan Parva (56)[Niryanana means departure or exit.], where the Kuru and Pandava armies march to battle; then comes the parva that describes the numbers of warriors and chariots (57), and the arrival of the intolerance-inspiring messenger Uluka
(58); then the parva that tells the story of Amba (59); then the wonder-inspiring parva that tells of the anointment
of Bhishma (60); then comes the parva that describes the creation of Jambu (61)[One of the seven continents (dvipa) that surround Mount Meru. Sometimes, the number of continents is also
given as eighteen. But seven is more standard. The word dvipa also means island. But here, it has been used in the
alternative meaning, a division of the terrestrial world.]and Bhumi Parva (62), which
gives an account of the expanse of the continents; then Bhagavad-gita Parva (63); then the parva describing the
killing of Bhishma (64); then the anointment of Drona (65) and then the parva with the death of the sanshaptakas
(66); then Abhimanyu Vadha (67)[The slaying of Abhimanyu.] Parva; then Pratijna Parva (68)[Oath.]; then Jayadratha Vadha Parva (69)[The slaying of Jayadratha.]; then
Ghatotkacha Vadha Parva (70)[The slaying of Ghatotkacha.]; then the account of the slaying of Drona (71) that makes one's hair stand up; after that the parva that is named after the release of the narayana weapon (72); then it is known as Karna Parva
(73)[Named after Karna.]; after that it is known as Shalya Parva (74)[Named after Shalya.]; then the parva that has the entering of the lake (75) and after
that Gada Yuddha Parva (76)[Duel of the clubs.]; then the parva that describes the river Sarasvati and places of pilgrimage and dynasties (77) and then Souptika (78)[The word souptika means something connected with sleep and the name is a reference to the fact that the
protagonists were asleep and the incidents took place at night.]; then the dreadful Aishika Parva (79) 60 and then Jalapradana (80)[Offering of water.]; then
Stri Parva (81)[Women.]; then it is known as Shraddha Parva (82) 63 with funeral rites for the dead Kuru warriors; then
the coronation of the wise Dharmaraja (83); then the subjugation of Charvaka (84) who was a demon who appeared in the garb of a Brahmana; then the parva that describes the dividing up of the houses (85); then Shanti Parva (86)[Peace.] where the duties of kings are described; then the parva where duties during contingencies are described
(87); then that which describes the way to salvation (88); then Anushasana Parva (89) that describes disciplines
and the parva that describes the wise Bhishma's ascent to heaven (90); next is Ashvamedha Parva (91) that destroys all sins and Anugita Parva (92) that concerns spiritual attainment; next come dwelling in the hermitage (93),
meeting the sons (94) and the arrival of Narada (95); then the terrible Moushala Parva (96)[Concerning clubs.], then Mahaprasthanika Parva (97)[The great departure.], and then Svargarohanika Parva (98)[Ascent to heaven.]; then follows the Purana known as Harivamsha (99)[The lineage of Hari.] that
is an appendix; and finally comes the great Bhavishya Parva (100), 69 which is also an appendix.

'These one hundred parvas were recited in full by the great Vyasa. Later, in the Naimisha forest, Lomaharshana,
the son of a suta, recited them exactly again, having classified them into eighteen parvas. The gist of Bharata is
given there as a summary of this collection of parvas.

'In Pousha Parva, the greatness of Utanka is described. In Poulama Parva, the extent of the lineage of Bhrigu is
described; in Astika, the birth of all the snakes and Garuda, the churning of the ocean and the birth of
Uchchaihshrava[Indra's horse, which emerged as a result of the churning of the ocean.]. Then is recounted the story of the great-souled Bharatas, as described at the snake-sacrifice of
King Parikshit[This is the sixth parva, listed as the descent of the first generation. After this, one loses the matching between
the eighteen-parva classification and the 100-parva classification, since the text now sticks to the eighteen-parva
classification.]. In Sambhava Parva is described the birth of various kings, Brahmanas and the sage Dvaipayana,
the partial incarnations of the gods are recounted, the births of the daityas, danavas[One may loosely use the word demon for both daitya and danava, but daityas are descendants of Diti and
danavas are descendants of Danu.] and powerful yakshas, and
of nagas[Nagas are not snakes. Snakes are sarpas. Nagas can perhaps be translated as serpents. Unlike snakes, nagas
can assume other forms (such as human) and live in separate geographical regions, not earth. They are also sometimes semi-divine. Sarpas live on earth.], snakes, gandharvas and birds and all the other diverse living creatures; the births of the great Vasus
from the Bhagirathi and in the house of Shantanu and their subsequent ascent to heaven and the birth of Bhishma
from their energy is described, his renunciation of the kingdom, his adoption of brahmacharya, his adherence to the
vow, his protection of Chitrangada and after Chitrangada's death, his protection of his younger brother[Vichitravirya.], and his
subsequent placing of Vichitravirya on the throne. The birth of Dharma among men, as a result of Animandavya's
curse, and the births of Dhritarashtra and Pandu, thanks to Krishna Dvaipayana's boon, and also that of the Pandavas, is described. The conspiracy of Duryodhana on the journey to Varanavata, the digging of a tunnel on Vidu-
ra's advice and the meeting between the Pandavas and the terrible-looking Hidimba in the forest and the birth of
Ghatotkacha are next described. Then follow the disguised existence of the Pandavas in the house of the Brahmana, the killing of Vaka and the amazement of the townspeople. Then, after defeating Angaraparna on the banks
of the Ganga, Arjuna, together with his brothers, went to Panchala. Then follow the supreme accounts of Tapati,
Vasishtha and Ourva, the wondrous story of the five Indras, Drupada's sorrow that his daughter should have five
husbands and the account of Droupadi's divinely arranged marriage. Vidura's arrival and meeting with Keshava,
the life in Khandavaprastha and the rule over half the kingdom and Narada's command to Droupadi to follow separate hours, where the story of Sunda and Upasunda is told and Partha's[Arjuna.] departure to the forest and his meeting
with Ulupi on the way are then described. Next there is the description of the birth of Babhruvahana, the visit to
many sacred places of pilgrimage, Arjuna's abduction of Subhadra with Vasudeva's permission in the chariot that
goes everywhere at the will of the rider and on the arrival of Krishna, the son of Devaki, the burning of Khandava
forest and their receiving of the chakra and the bow. The birth in Subhadra's womb of the supreme Abhimanyu,
the saving of Maya's life from the fire and the saving of the life of the serpent and the sage Mandapala's giving
birth to a son in the womb of a sharanga bird[A chataka or a peacock.]-all this and other matters are found in the long Adi Parva, which
is the first. Vyasa, of great energy, divided this into 218 chapters[The critical version has 225 chapters.]. The great one had 7984 shlokas in the text.

'The second is known as Sabha Parva[Assembly hall.], with extensive accounts. It describes the building of the assembly hall
by the Pandavas and their meeting with their servants, the description of the assembly halls of the guardians of the
world by Narada who knows the celestial worlds, the beginning of the royal sacrifice, the killing of Jarasandha, the
freeing by Krishna of the kings kept imprisoned in Girivraja[Jarasandha was the king of Magadha and he had imprisoned the kings in his capital, Girivraja.], the killing of Shishupala at the royal sacrifice when
there was a dispute about offerings, Duryodhana's misery and jealousy at the magnificence of the sacrifice, Bhi-
ma's taunting of Duryodhana in the assembly hall, as a consequence of which he plotted a game of dice in which
the crafty Shakuni defeated the son of Dharma[Yudhishthira.], Droupadi's immersion and deliverance like a boat in the ocean
of gambling, after which, witnessing the deliverance, King Duryodhana challenged the Pandavas to another game
of dice. The sage named all this Sabha Parva, with seventy-two chapters and 2511 shlokas.

'The great Aranyaka Parva[Concerning the forest.], the third parva, follows. The wise son of Dharma is followed by the townspeople.
All the Vrishnis and Panchalas arrive, the slaying of Soubha and Kirmira is described and Arjuna's, whose energy
was boundless, wanderings in search of weapons, his duel with Mahadeva who was in the form of a hunter, his ascent to heaven and his sighting of the guardians of the world. Also described is the grieving Yudhishthira, who was
tormented over his vices, meeting with the great sage Brihadashva who had knowledge of the atman, the righteous
but pitiful tale of Nala is there, the equanimity of Damayanti and Nala's succumbing to vice, the bringing of the
news of Arjuna being in heaven by Lomasha to the great-souled Pandavas who were then forest-dwellers. Then
follows the pilgrimages of the great-souled Pandavas, the slaying of Jatasura, Bhimasena's journey to Gandhamadana at Droupadi's request, where he transgressed a lotus pond in search of a mandara flower[The flower of the coral tree, one of the five trees in heaven.] and had a
great fight with the rakshasas and yakshas led by Manimana. There is the story of Agastya and his swallowing of
Vatapi and his sleeping with Lopamudra to beget a son, then the account of the hawk and the pigeon, where Indra,
Agni and Dharma test King Shibi, the description of Rishyashringa who was celibate from boyhood and the description of Rama, son of Jamadagni, of unbounded energy, where the slaying of Kartyavirya and the Haihayas is
told[Kartyavirya was the king of the Haihayas. This Rama is Parashurama, son of Jamadagni. Kartyavirya was
killed by Parashurama because he abducted Jamadagni's sacred cow.]. There is the story of Sukanya, where sage Chyavana of the Bhargava clan allowed the Ashvins to drink
soma[Nectar, beverage of the gods.] at Sharyati's sacrifice and obtained everlasting youth as a result. There is the account of Jantu, where King
Somaka sacrificed his son to obtain more sons and obtained one hundred sons, the story of Ashtavakra, where the
sage defeated Bandin in a debate and won back his father who had been immersed in the ocean. Having obtained
divine weapons for his elder brother, Savyasachi[Arjuna.] battled the Nivatakavachas of Hiranyapura. Partha[Arjuna.] then returned to his brothers in Gandhamadana. In the cattle expedition, Kiriti[Arjuna.] fought a battle with the gandharvas. The
Pandavas then returned to the lake named Dvaityavana, Droupadi was abducted from the hermitage by Jayadratha
and Bhima, whose speed equalled that of the wind, pursued him. Then there is the meeting with Markandeya and
several stories, Krishna's meeting and conversation with Satya, the story of the measure of rice and that of Indradyumna and the accounts of Savitri, Ouddalaka and Vainya, the story of the Ramayana recounted at great
length, the theft of Karna's earrings by Purandara[Sacker of cities, Indra's name.], the account of the wood kindlings where Dharma teaches his
son and where the Pandavas, after obtaining a boon, leave for the west. This is known as Aranyaka Parva, the third
parva, where the great sage had 269 chapters[The critical edition has 298 chapters.] and 11,664 shlokas.

'Then occurs the extensive Virata Parva. It describes how the Pandavas arrived at the city of Virata, saw a large
shami tree[A large tree that was believed to contain fire inside it.] in a cremation ground and hid their weapons in it. Then is described their entry into the city and their
living there in disguise and the slaying of the evil Kichaka by Vrikodara[Bhima.]. The Kouravas were defeated by Arjuna
when the cattle were stolen and Virata's bovine wealth was freed by the Pandavas. Virata gave his daughter Uttara
to Kiriti[Arjuna.] for Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra and the slayer of enemies. I have described the contents of the
fourth large Virata Parva. The great sage composed this parva in sixty-seven chapters and 2050 shlokas.

'After that, listen to the contents of the fifth Udyoga Parva. When the Pandavas were dwelling in Upaplavya,
both Duryodhana and Arjuna, desirous of battle, went to Vasudeva and sought his help. Then the extremely wise
Krishna said, "O bulls among men! On one side, there is an akshouhini of my soldiers and, on the other, I as a noncombatant counsellor. Which shall I give you?" Not realizing his interests, the foolish Duryodhana asked for the
soldiers and Arjuna asked for Krishna as a non-combatant counsellor. Then the mighty king Dhritarashtra sent
Sanjaya as a messenger to the Pandavas to ask for peace. Hearing that the Pandavas had Vasudeva in front of them,
Dhritarashtra suffered from insomnia and worry and Vidura's many and diverse words of advice to the wise king
Dhritarashtra are described and the supreme spiritual doctrine of Sanatsujata told to the sorrowing and anguished
king. Next morning, in front of the king, in court, Sanjaya spoke of the union between Vasudeva and Arjuna. It was
then that the great Krishna, moved by pity and desirous of bringing peace, himself went to Hastinapura to find
peace and Krishna's proposal for peace was rebuffed by King Duryodhana, though this was in the interest of both
parties. Then, hearing the evil counsel of Karna, Duryodhana and others, Krishna displayed to the kings his powers
of yoga. Then, Krishna took Karna on his chariot and gave him good advice about options, but intoxicated with
arrogance, Karna refused. Then follows the marching out of Hastinapura of chariots, horses, infantry and elephants
and the recounting of their numbers. On the day before the great battle, the prince[Duryodhana.] sent the cruel-tongued Uluka
as a messenger to the Pandavas. Then is related the numbers of charioteers and great charioteers and the story of
Amba. These are the many accounts in the fifth parva of Bharata, titled Udyoga Parva and with incidents of war
and peace. The great sage Vyasa, of vast wisdom, composed this in 186 chapters[The critical edition has 197 chapters.] and 6696 shlokas.

'Then is told the wonderful Bhishma Parva, where Sanjaya recounted the creation of the region known as Jambu. Thereafter is narrated the fierce and terrible battle that raged for ten days and the depression of Yudhishthira's
army. The supremely wise Vasudeva dispelled there[In that parva.] Partha's[Arjuna.] lassitude born out of delusion, by invoking the
teachings of salvation. Also is narrated how the great archer Partha placed Shikhandi in front of him in the war and
wounded Bhishma with his sharp arrows and felled him from the chariot. This sixth great parva of the Bharata is
Bhishma Parva and was composed by Vyasa, learned in the Vedas, in 117 chapters and 5884 shlokas.

'Then follows the wonderful Drona Parva with many accounts, where Partha had to retreat before the sanshaptakas in battle and Kiriti[Arjuna's name is Kiriti, meaning the diademed one.] vanquished King Bhagadatta, equal to Shakra in war, and his elephant Supratika. There
is described the slaying, by many great warriors led by Jayadratha, of the brave Abhimanyu, still a boy and not yet
a major. Angered at Abhimanyu's death, Partha killed King Jayadratha and seven akshouhinis of soldiers in battle
and killed in war the remaining sanshaptakas. In Drona Parva is recounted the deaths of brave Alambusha, Shrutayus, Jalasandha, Soumadatti[Bhurishrava.], Virata, the great warrior Drupada and Ghatotkacha and others. When Drona was
downed in battle, unforgiving, Ashvatthama unleashed the awful narayana weapon. This is the detailed seventh
parva of Bharata, Drona Parva, where many rulers of the world met their death, warriors and bulls among men
mentioned earlier. The sage, the son of Parashara[Vyasa.] and master of great knowledge, composed this in 170
chapters[The critical edition has 173 chapters.] and 8909 shlokas.

'Thereafter follows the most wonderful Karna Parva, where the appointment of the wise king of Madra[Shalya. Shalya was Karna's charioteer.] as
charioteer is described. The old story of the destruction of Tripura is recounted. Then is narrated, at the time of
marching out, the strong words exchanged between Karna and Shalya and the account of the swan and the crow,
with an insulting moral. There is described the anger of Yudhishthira and Kiriti towards each other and Partha's
slaying of the great warrior Karna in a duel of chariots. Those who know the Bharata call this parva the eighth parva. Karna Parva has sixty-nine chapters and 4900 shlokas.

'The next parva is the wonderful Shalya Parva. After the deaths of the chief warriors, the king of Madra became
the commander of the army. In different parts of Shalya Parva is described the deaths of the chief warriors of the
Kuru army in circular chariot duels, Shalya's death at the hands of the great-souled Dharmaraja, the furious battle
of the clubs is described here and the holy pilgrimage of the Sarasvati River. This wonderful parva with diverse
meanings is known by those good at numbers as one with fifty-nine chapters[The critical edition has sixty-four chapters.] and 3220 shlokas, composed by
the great sage who wished to spread the fame of the Kuru lineage.

'I shall now describe to you the terrible Souptika Parva. Once the sons of Pritha[Pritha is Kunti's name and the sons of Pritha are the Pandavas.] had withdrawn, the warriors
Kritavarma, Kripa and the son of Drona[Ashvatthama.] came to the field of battle in the evening and saw the intolerant King
Duryodhana lying on the ground, his thighs broken and his body covered with blood. Firm in his anger, the great
warrior, the son of Drona, vowed that he would not take off his armour without killing all the Panchalas led by
Dhrishtadyumna and the Pandavas and their allies. Protected by Krishna's strength, the five sons of Pritha and
Satyaki[Yadava warrior.], the great wielder of the bow, escaped. Everyone else died. Those bulls among men, led by the son of
Drona, killed the Panchalas and their families as they slept peacefully in the night. Grief-stricken because of her
sons, and mourning the deaths of her father and brother, Droupadi sat before her husbands, resolving to die of fasting. Moved by Droupadi's words, Bhima, the performer of great deeds, was angered and ran after the son of his
preceptor, the son of Bharadvaja[Dronacharya was sage Bharadvaja's son and was the preceptor, while Ashvatthama was Dronacharya's son.
Because he was Bharadvaja's son, Dronacharya was known as Bhaaradvaja. The absence of diacritical marks
makes distinction between Bharadvaja (the father) and Bhaaradvaja (the son) difficult, especially when we write
Bhaaradvaja as Bharadvaja to make the translation smooth. However, the context should make it clear whether
Bharadvaja or Bhaaradvaja is meant.]. Driven by destiny and out of fear of Bhimasena, the son of Drona unleashed
the celestial weapon, urging it to destroy the Pandavas. Krishna neutralized the words and said that would not be,
and Phalguna[Arjuna. Phalguni and Phalguna are used synonymously.] neutralized the weapon with one of his own. Dvaipayana cursed the son of Drona, and he too
cursed Dvaipayana. After the funerals of all the kings were performed with offerings of water, there follows the
acknowledgement by Pritha[Kunti.] of the secret story of how Karna was born from her. The raconteurs know this as
the tenth parva, Souptika Parva, composed by the great soul, the sage of unlimited intelligence in eighteen chapters
and 870 shlokas.

'After that is told the pitiful Stri Parva. There is recounted the pitiful lamentations of the wives of the heroes and
Gandhari and Dhritarashtra's wrath and fainting. They saw the Kshatriya warriors lying on the field of battle, unable to escape destiny-dead sons, brothers and fathers. There the extremely wise king, chief among those who
show righteous conduct, burnt the dead bodies of the kings according to prescribed rites. This is known as the great
and pitiful eleventh parva. There are twenty-seven chapters in it and seventy-five shlokas are counted. The great-
souled author composed the story of Bharata so as to move the hearts and bring tears to the eyes of good people.

'After that follows the twelfth Shanti Parva, which increases the understanding. There is related Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira's despondency at having killed his fathers, brothers, sons, maternal uncles and relations by marriage.
On the bed of arrows[Bhishma was on a bed of arrows when he told this.] is related duties and laws that kings who desire to have knowledge should study. Also recounted are norms during emergencies and rules of time and cause. The wonderful path to salvation is described in
great detail and a person who understands these attains supreme knowledge. This is known as the twelfth parva,
loved by the wise and this parva has 339 chapters[The critical edition has 353 chapters.] and 14,525 shlokas, filled with the fruit of meditation.

'Then follows the excellent Anushasana Parva. There, Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, was composed after
learning about righteous conduct from Bhishma, son of Bhagirathi. It describes the rules of dharma and artha in
great detail, the different rules of donation and their fruits, the different merits of charity depending on persons to
whom charity is given, the rules of living, the rites of individual conduct and the unmatched supremacy of truth.
All these diverse and supreme accounts are recounted in Anushasana Parva and it also describes Bhishma's ascent
to heaven. This is the thirteenth parva, describing the certainty of righteous conduct. It has 146 chapters[The critical edition has 154 chapters.] and
6700 shlokas.

'After that is the fourteenth, Ashvamedhika Parva. There is related the excellent story of Samvarta and Marutta,
the discovery of the golden treasures[By the Pandavas.], then the birth of Parikshit, who was burnt almost dead by the weapon and
revived by Krishna again, the Pandava's[Arjuna's.] journey with the sacrificial horse that had been set loose, his combats
with angry princes, Dhananjaya's encounter with Chitrangada's son[Babhruvahana.], his great danger in the battle with Babhruvahana and the story of the mongoose in the great horse-sacrifice. This extremely wonderful parva is known as
Ashvamedhika Parva and he who knew the truth composed it in 133 chapters[The critical edition has ninety-six chapters.] and 3320 shlokas.

'Then follows the fifteenth Ashramavasika Parva. In this, abdicating the kingdom, King Dhritarashtra, accompanied by Gandhari and Vidura, retire to the forest. On seeing this, the virtuous Pritha[Kunti.], who always served her superiors, left the kingdom of her sons and followed the old couple. As a result of the blessings of the sage
Krishna[Vedavyasa.], the king saw an incomparable sight. He saw his dead sons, grandsons and other kings, who had gone
to the other world, return. On seeing this, the old king discarded his sorrow and obtained with his wife the greatest
fruits of his righteous deeds. Having resorted to righteous conduct all his life, Vidura also attained the supreme
state. So did the learned and wise adviser Sanjaya, son of Gavalgana. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira met Narada and
learnt from Narada about the destruction of the Vrishni lineage. This is the wonderful Ashramavasika Parva. He
who knew the truth composed it in forty-two chapters[The critical edition has forty-seven chapters.] and 1506 shlokas.

'Then is told the terrible Mousala Parva[Concerning clubs.]. This tells the story of how those tigers among men[The men of the Vrishni lineage.], scars of
weapons on their bodies, on account of the Brahmana's staff, were drunk and deprived of their senses. On the
shores of the salty ocean, with eraka grass[A kind of reed.] that became like thunder in their hands, they killed one another, driven by destiny. There is told that Rama[Balarama.] and Keshava[Krishna.], after destroying their race, themselves succumbed to
the great all-consuming time. Then is described how Arjuna, bull among men, journeyed to Dvaravati, and seeing
it bereft of the Vrishnis, succumbs to great sorrow and affliction. Having performed the funeral rites for his brave
maternal uncle Vasudeva[Krishna's father. Vasudeva is Krishna's father and therefore, Krishna is known as Vaasudeva. The absence
of diacritical marks makes distinction between Vasudeva and Vaasudeva difficult, especially because Vaasudeva is
written as Vasudeva to make the translation smooth. However, the context should make it clear whether Vasudeva
(the father) or Vaasudeva (the son) is meant.], he saw the warriors of the Yadu race lying dead where they had been drinking. He
then performed the funeral ceremonies over the bodies of the great Vasudeva[Krishna.] and Rama[Balarama.] and the chief
among those of the Vrishni lineage. Then is described the journey from Dvaravati with the aged and the children
and the sufferings, with the defeat of the gandiva bow. He witnessed the inefficacy of his celestial weapons and the
failure to prevent the destruction of the Yadava women. He was despondent on seeing this, and on Vyasa's advice,
went to Dharmaraja and asked for permission to become an ascetic. All this is described in the sixteenth Mousala
Parva in eight chapters and 300 shlokas.

'Then follows the seventeenth Mahaprasthanika Parva. There, the Pandavas, bulls among men, accompanied by
the divine Droupadi, gave up their kingdom and left for their great journey. He who knew the truth composed it in
three chapters and 120 shlokas.

'That which comes next is called Svargarohana Parva, full of celestial matters. Replete with the fruits of meditation, it has five chapters and 200 shlokas.

'These are the contents of the eighteen parvas. The appendices are known as Hari Vamsha[The genealogy of Hari.] and
Bhavishya[The book of the future.]. Thus the entire contents of Bharata are described in the chapter known as Parva Sangraha. Eighteen
akshouhinis of soldiers came together to fight and the battle raged for eighteen days.

'A twice-born who is learned in the Vedas, the angas[The Vedangas.] and the Upanishads, but does not know this account,
cannot be said to have any learning at all. Having heard this account, so worthy of being heard, no other account
will seem pleasing, like the harsh cawing of crows sounds to one who has heard the cuckoo sing. Like the three
worlds have evolved from the five elements[Earth, water, energy, wind and sky.], the inspirations of all poets flow from this supreme history. O
Brahmanas! Just as the four kinds of beings[Those born alive from wombs, those born from eggs, those that are plants and those that are born from
sweat (insects).] are derived from the sky, all the Puranas[Purana means ancient account or tale and there are eighteen great Puranas, each describing creation, destruction, different eras, genealogies and the histories of the solar and lunar dynasties.] draw upon this account. Like the senses are dependent on all the varied workings of the mind, all action and all qualities are dependent on this account. There is no tale on earth that is not based on this account, just as it is impossible for the body
to be alive without food. Like servants who wish to advance always live off high-born masters, all great poets
make a living off this account. The Bharata flowed from the lips of Dvaipayana[Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva.] and is immeasurable, sacred,
purifying, salvation and the dispeller of sin. He who hears it as it is being recited has no need to bathe in the waters
of Pushkara[Place of pilgrimage near Ajmer.]. Just as the wide ocean can easily be crossed by men who possess boats, this section known as Parvasamgraha, helps understand the supreme and great account that is full of deep meaning.'
