Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing the words of the intelligent Vasudeva, Bhishma joined his hands in salutation
and raising his head a bit, spoke the following words. "O illustrious Vishnu! I bow down before you. You are
the origin of the worlds. O Hrishikesha! You are the unvanquished creator and destroyer. I bow down before
the one who is the doer in the universe, who is the soul of the universe and who is the creator of the universe.
You are the objective and you are beyond the five elements. I bow down before the three worlds. I bow down
before the one who is beyond the three worlds. I bow down before the one who is the lord of yoga. You are the
final refuge of everything. O Purushottama! I have sought refuge in your words and am able to see your divine
form in the three paths[Heaven, earth and the nether regions.]. I can also see your true and eternal form. Your infinite energy bears up the wind
along seven paths[Vayu (wind) has seven flows-avaha, pravaha, nivaha, varaha, udhvaha, samvaha and parivaha.]. Your head extends up to the firmament and your feet are on the goddess earth. The directions are your arms. Your eyes are the sun and Shakra is established in your valour. In our mind's eye, we see
your undecaying form. It has the complexion of the atasi flower. It is attired in yellow garments. It is like a
cloud tinged with lightning. With a desire to attain the best objective, I have faithfully sought refuge with you.
O Pundarikaksha! O supreme among gods! Think of my welfare."

'Vasudeva replied, "O bull among men! O king! Since you have supreme devotion in me, I have shown you
my divine form. O Indra among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I do not show this self to one
without devotion, one with false devotion, or one without self-control. You have always been my devotee and
you have always been devoted to the truth and have resorted to control, austerities, truth, generosity and attachment to purity. O Bhishma! O king! It is because of your own austerities that you have been able to see
me. The worlds from which there is no return[No rebirth.] are there for you. O foremost among the Kuru lineage! Fifty-
six days still remain in your life. O Bhishma! After that, you will cast aside your body and obtain the auspicious fruits of your deeds. These gods, the Vasus, are astride their celestial vehicles and all of them are like
blazing fires. Though they are invisible, they are protecting you until it is the northern solstice. O illustrious
one! O foremost among men! As soon as the sun turns in the northward direction with the progress of time,
you will go to the worlds obtained by those with knowledge, and from where there is no return. O Bhishma! O
brave one! When you go to that world, all the knowledge you possess will be destroyed. That is the reason all
of these have assembled before you, for an analysis of dharma. Yudhishthira's knowledge has been affected by
sorrow over his kin, though he is firmly based on truth. Tell him about the union of dharma and artha. Speak
meaningful words that will dispel his sorrow."'
