Bhishma said,  "O  descendant  of  the  Bharata  lineage!  Vyasa's  son  ascended  the  slope  of  the  mountain.  He
sought out a flat spot that was devoid of grass and sat down there. Following the sacred texts, the great sage,
accomplished in yoga, progressively held his atman in different parts of the body, beginning with the feet[In practising yoga, one goes upwards through the body.]. A
short time after the sun had risen, the learned one sat facing the east, humbly drawing in his hands and feet. There
weren't any flocks of birds there, nothing to see and nothing to hear. Vyasa's intelligent son embarked on yoga
there. Delinked from all attachments, he saw his atman there. On seeing the sun, Shuka laughed. To realize the
path of moksha, he again resorted to yoga. The great lord of yoga overcame all limits of the sky[This means that space no longer held any meaning for him.]. He circumambulated devarshi Narada and told the supreme rishi that he had resorted to yoga. 'O one rich in austerities! May
you be fortunate. I have seen the path that I should resort to. O immensely radiant one! With your favours, I will
go to that beneficial objective.' Having obtained Narada's permission, Dvaipayana's son saluted him.

'"He again resorted to yoga and entered the sky. He arose from the slopes of Kailasa and ascended into the sky.
Vyasa's handsome son had made up his mind and travelled through the firmament. As he arose, the best among
brahmanas looked like Vinata's resplendent son[Garuda.]. He possessed the speed of the thought and the wind and all the
creatures saw him. Along that divine path, the lord's complexion was like that of the fire or the sun. He thought
about the progress of all the three worlds. He proceeded without any fear, single-minded in his attention. All the
creatures, mobile and immobile, saw him. As is proper, they worshipped him, according to their capacity. The residents of heaven showered down celestial flowers. All the gandharvas and the large number of apsaras were astounded on seeing him. The rishis and the Siddhas were also extremely surprised. 'Who is this who has obtained
success through his austerities and is travelling through the sky? His body is downwards and his face is upwards.
He is looking at everything with tranquility.' The supremely patient one, famous in the three worlds, turned his
face towards the east and looked at the sun. He seemed to fill the entire sky with his sound. On seeing him swiftly
advance, all the large numbers of apsaras were frightened in their minds. O king! They were filled with great wonder. There were Panchachuda[Panchachuda is an apsara, the word means one with five tufts (or crests) of hair.] and the others and their eyes dilated widely. 'Who is this divinity who has attained such a supreme end? There is no doubt that he has been emancipated and is without desire. That is the reason he has been able to come here.' Passing beyond them, he went to Mount Malaya, always frequented by Urvashi and Purvachitti[Names of two other apsaras.]. At the sight of the brahmana rishi's son, they too were filled with great wonder. 'Behold.
This brahmana has used his intelligence and has studied the Vedas. Like the moon, in a short while, he will traverse through the sky. It is through serving his father that he has obtained this supreme success. He is devoted to
his father. He is firm in his austerities. He is a son who is loved by his father. Why has his father not paid attention?
Why has he allowed him to go?' Shuka was supremely devoted to dharma. When he heard Urvashi's words and
the purport of those words penetrated his mind, he looked towards all the directions. He glanced at the firmament,
the earth, with its mountains, forests and groves, and the lakes and rivers. All the gods also looked towards him.
They joined their hands in salutation and showed great reverence towards Dvaipayana's son. Shuka,  supremely
knowledgable about dharma, spoke these words. 'My father may follow me and call out my name. In that event, all
of you control yourselves and reply to him. Since all of you bear affection towards me, please speak those words
for my sake.' On hearing Shuka's words, all the directions, the forests, the groves, the oceans, the rivers and the
mountains answered in every direction, 'O brahmana! It shall be as you instruct. When the rishi speaks words to
us, we will loudly reply in that way.'"'
