'Bhishma said, "Hearing these sweet words, Goutama was astounded. O king! He was curious and looked at
Rajadharma.

'"Rajadharma said, 'I am the son of Kashyapa and Dakshayani is my mother[Dakshayani means Daksha's daughter. The sage Kashyapa was married
to several of Daksha's daughters and all beings are descended from them.]. O bull among brahmanas! You
are a guest and possess all the qualities. Welcome.'"

'Bhishma said, "In accordance with the prescribed rites, he gave him all the honours. He fashioned a celestial
seat that was covered with shala flowers. That region around the Ganga was traversed by Bhagiratha's chariot and
was inhabited by a large number of fishes. Kashyapa[Descended from Kashyapa.] properly lit a blazing fire and cooked some extremely large
fish, offering them to Goutama, the guest. The brahmana fed on these and was delighted. The great-minded one
then fanned him with his wings, so that his exhaustion might become less. When he was seated and rested, he
asked him about his gotra. He said, 'I am Goutama, a brahmana.' He did not say anything else. He gave him a celestial bed covered with fragrant leaves and adorned with divine flowers. Goutama happily lay down on it. Once he
had lain down on the bed, the eloquent Kashyapa, the king of the cranes, asked him, 'What is the reason behind
your coming here?' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At this, Goutama replied, 'O immensely intelligent one! I
am poor. I have come to the ocean with the object of acquiring some riches.' Kashyapa cheerfully replied, 'O foremost among brahmanas! You should not be anxious. You will be successful. You will return to your home with
riches. O lord! It is Brihaspati's view that there are four means of obtaining riches-inheritance, fate, deeds and
friends. I have appeared before you as a friend and you are also my well-wisher. I will try on your account, so that
you can truly obtain riches.' When it was morning, he asked him[Rajadharma asked Goutama.] whether he was comfortable and said, 'O amiable one! Advance along this path and you will be successful. Once you have travelled three yojanas, there will be
a great lord of the rakshasas. He is immensely strong and is known by the name of Virupaksha. He is my friend. O
best among brahmanas! Go to him. Because of my telling him, there is no doubt that he will give you as much of
riches as you desire.' O king! Having been thus addressed, Goutama was no longer exhausted and departed.

'"O great king! Along the way, as much as he wished, he ate fruit that was like amrita and progressed quickly.
There were excellent forests of sandalwood, aloe and cinnamon. He reached a city named Meruvraja, with stone
walls. There were ramparts made out of stone and a mechanical gate made out of stone. O king! It was announced
to the intelligent Indra among rakshasas that a beloved well-wisher had sent a beloved guest to him. O Yudhishthira! At this, the Indra among rakshasas told his messengers, 'Goutama has arrived at the gates of the city. Quickly
go and bring him here.' Men attired in white garments emerged from that supreme city. O great king! The messengers of the lord of the rakshasas went to the city gates and told the brahmana, 'O Goutama! Make haste and come
quickly. The king wishes to see you. The brave lord of the rakshasas is Virupaksha and you have heard of him. He
wishes to see you swiftly. Therefore, you must make haste.' Because of his amazement, the brahmana's exhaustion
vanished and he hurried. Goutama saw the prosperity of the city and marvelled greatly. With the servants, he
quickly arrived at the king's residence. At that time, the brahmana wished to see the Indra among the rakshasas."'
