Sanjaya said, "There were many excellent elephants that were urged on by your son. Wishing to kill Dhrishtadyumna, they angrily advanced against Parshata. These were among the best who fought on elephants, from the
east, the south, Anga, Vanga, Pundra, Magadha, Tamraliptaka, Mekala, Kosala, Madra, Dasharna and Nishadha. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were skilled in fighing with elephants and united with those from Kalinga.
Arrows, spears and iron arrows showered down like rain from clouds and in that battle, all of them sprinkled Pan-
chala, who was like a mountain. Those elephants were violently urged on against the enemy with goads and with
toes prodding the flanks. As they advanced towards Parshata, he showered down iron arrows on them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Each of those angry elephants was like a mountain and he pierced each with ten, six or
eight arrows. He was enveloped by those elephants, like clouds covering the sun. On seeing this, the Pandus and
Panchalas roared. They raised sharp weapons and attacked those elephants, the arrows making music on the bowstrings. Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi's sons, the Prabhadrakas, Satyaki, Shikhandi and the valiant Chekitana advanced. The elephants were driven by mlecchas[Barbarians, those who do not speak Sanskrit.] and used their trunks to pick up men, horses and chariots and
crush them with their feet. They pierced others with the tips of their tusks, picked them up and flung them down.
Others were stuck to the tips of the tusks and looked terrible. Vanga's[The king of Vanga's.] elephant was stationed in front of him.
Satyaki powerfully struck it with a fierce iron arrow. Pierced in its inner organs, it fell down. Abandoning that elephant, he[The king of Vanga.] was about to descend from the elephant. However, Satyaki struck him on the breast with an iron arrow and made him fall down on the ground. Pundra's elephant was descending like a mobile mountain. Sahadeva
carefully killed it with three iron arrows. It was deprived of its flag, its rider, its armour, its standard and its life.
Having brought that elephant down, Sahadeva advanced against Anga[The king of Anga.]. However, Nakula asked Sahadeva to
desist and himself attacked Anga. He struck him with three iron arrows that were like Yama's staff and struck the
elephant with one hundred. Anga hurled eight hundred spears that were as bright as the rays of the sun. However,
Nakula sliced each of these down into three fragments. Pandava then severed his head with an arrow that was in
the shape of a half-moon. Having been killed, the mleccha fell down, together with the tusker. The son of their preceptor was skilled in the technique of managing elephants[One has to deduce what this means. The person killed was actually the prince of Anga, though referred
to as the king of Anga. The king of Anga was the preceptor of all those from Anga. The Critical edition
uses the expression acharyaputra, meaning the preceptor's son. Some non-Critical versions directly say,
the son of Anga.]. When he was killed, the excellent ones from Anga
attacked Nakula on elephants. The best of flags fluttered and the sides[Of the elephants.] were decorated in gold. They looked like
mountains on fire and wished to swiftly destroy the enemy. There were those from Mekala, Utkala, Kalinga,
Nishadha and Tamraliptaka. Wishing to kill him, they showered down arrows and spears. They enveloped Nakula,
like the sun shrouded by clouds. At this, the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Somakas were enraged. A battle commenced between those rathas and the elephants. Showers of arrows and thousands of spears were released. These
shattered the temples of the elephants and penetrated their inner organs in many ways. The tusks were pierced by
iron arrows and seemed to be ornamented. Sahadeva quickly killed eight giant elephants with sixty-four extremely
energetic arrows and brought them down, together with their riders. Nakula, the descendant of the Kuru lineage,
carefully drew his supreme bow and used many straight-flying iron arrows to kill many elephants. Shini's descendant, Panchala, Droupadi's sons, the Prabhadrakas and Shikhandi brought down many showers of arrows on the
mighty elephants. The warriors on the Pandu side were like clouds full of rain and the elephants of the enemy were
like mountains. Slain by those showers of arrows, they fell down, like mountains shattered by a storm of thunder.
Your elephants were thus killed by the Pandus, who were like elephants among men. The soldiers[The Kourava soldiers.] were soon
seen like a river with shattered banks. Having thus agitated the soldiers[The Kourava soldiers.], the soldiers of the sons of Pandu
glanced towards them and again advanced towards Karna.

' "O great king! While Sahadeva was angrily scorching your army, Duhshasana advanced against him and it was
brother against brother. The kings who were there, witnessed a great battle between them and roaring like lions,
waved their garments around. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your archer son was angry and pierced Pandu's powerful son in the chest with three arrows. O king! Sahadeva pierced your son with an iron arrow and again
pierced him with seventy, striking his charioteer with three. O king! In that great battle, Duhshasana severed his
bow and struck Sahadeva in the arms and the chest with seventy-three arrows. Sahadeva became wrathful and in
that great encounter, grasped a sword. The foremost among warriors whirled and hurled it towards your handsome
son. That great sword severed his bow, with an arrow still affixed to it. It then fell down on the ground, like a serpent that has been dislodged from the sky. The powerful Sahadeva picked up another bow and shot an arrow that
was like death towards Duhshasana. That arrow was as bright as Yama's staff and descended. However, Kourava
severed it into two parts with a sword that was sharp at the edges. As that sword suddenly descended in the battle,
Sahadeva cut it down with sharp arrows and seemed to be laughing[By excising a shloka, the Critical edition has a break in continuity here. In the missing shloka,
Duhshasana hurled the sword towards Sahadeva.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
that great battle, your son swiftly shot sixty-four arrows towards Sahadeva's chariot. O king! In that encounter,
many arrows descended with force. However, Sahadeva sliced down these with five arrows each. Having countered the great arrows that were shot by your son, Madri's son released a large number of arrows. O great king!
The powerful Sahadeva became angry and affixed an extremely fierce arrow that was like the Destroyer and like
Death. He drew his bow back with force and shot it towards your son. O king! It penetrated his armour and his
body with great force and penetrated the earth, like a snake entering a termite hill. O king! Your maharatha son lost
his senses. On seeing that he had lost his consciousness, his charioteer, who was frightened and himself severely
wounded with sharp arrows, quickly bore him away on the chariot. O Pandu's elder brother! O king! Having defeated him in the battle, Pandava cheerfully began to crush Duryodhana's army in every direction, like an extremely angry man crushing a large number of ants. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did he wrathfully crush
the Kourava soldiers.

' "O king! While Nakula was violently destroying the soldiers in the battle, Vaikartana Karna repulsed him.
Nakula laughed and spoke to Karna. 'After a long time, because of the kindness of destiny, you have seen me. O
wicked one! And in this battle, you have surfaced before my sight. You are the root cause of the evil, the enmity
and the quarrel. It is because of your sins that those of the Kuru lineage are clashing against each other and are being destroyed. I will kill you in the battle today and become successful, devoid of fever[Mental fever.].' Having been thus addressed, the son of the suta, who was himself like a prince and also an archer, replied to Nakula. 'O child! Strike
me in this battle. Let me see your manliness. O brave one! One should boast only after having performed deeds in
a battle. O son[The word used is tata and it means son. But it is also used to address anyone who is younger or junior.]! Those who do not speak in an encounter, but fight to the best of their strength, are known as
brave. Fight with me, to the utmost of your strength and I will destroy your pride today.' Having spoken thus, the
son of the suta swiftly struck Pandu's son. In that battle, he pierced him with seventy-three arrows that had been
sharpened on stone. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus pierced by the son of the suta, Nakula
pierced the son of the suta back with eighty arrows that were like venomous serpents. Karna severed his bow with
gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone. The supreme archer then struck Pandava with thirty arrows.
Those pierced his armour and drank his blood in the battle. They were like venomous serpents that drink water after entering the earth. O great king! Nakula, the destroyer of enemy heroes, became angry at this. He picked up another bow with a back that was embellished with gold. It was extremely difficult to resist. He pierced Karna with
twenty arrows and his charioteer with three. With an extremely sharp arrow that was like a razor at the tip, he severed Karna's bow. Having severed the bow, the brave one, who was regarded as a maharatha by the entire world,
laughed and struck him with three hundred arrows. O venerable one! On seeing that Karna was thus afflicted by
Pandu's son, all the rathas and all the gods were struck by supreme wonder. Vaikartana Karna picked up another
bow and struck Nakula between the shoulder joints with five arrows. With those arrows sticking to his chest,
Madri's son looked resplendent on the chariot, as if the sun was using its rays to shower radiance on the earth. O
venerable one! Nakula pierced Karna with seven iron arrows and again severed the ends of his bow. In that encounter, he[Karna.] picked up another bow that was even more powerful and enveloped Nakula and all the directions
with his arrows. When the maharatha was suddenly covered with arrows released from Karna's bow, he swiftly
used his own arrows to slice down those arrows. The sky was seen to be shrouded with a net of arrows and it was
as if the firmament was covered with a large number of fireflies that were flitting around. Hundreds of arrows were
released and covered the sky and it was as if it was full of a swarm of locusts that had been stirred up by the wind.
Arrows decorated in gold descended repeatedly in an array and were as beautiful as an array of swans. When the
sky was covered by the arrows, the sun was shrouded. O lord of the earth! No beings could descend and nothing
could be seen[That is, creatures like birds could not descend from the sky.]. In every direction, those large numbers of arrows obstructed their paths. Those two immensely
fortunate ones were as resplendent as two young suns that had just arisen. The arrows released from Karna's bow
slaughtered the Somakas. O Indra among kings! They were severely afflicted and pained by the arrows and lost
their lives. In a similar way, Nakula's arrows killed your soldiers. O king! They were driven away in all the directions, like clouds dispelled by the wind. Those two sets of soldiers were slaughtered by their large and divine arrows and withdrew from that rain of arrows, remaining only as spectators. When the men there were driven away
by Karna and Pandava's arrows, those two great-souled ones started to pierce each other with their showers of arrows. In that field of battle, they displayed their divine weapons. Wishing to kill each other, they violently enveloped each other. The arrows released by Nakula were tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. They
seemed to remain stationed there, after having enveloped Karna. O king! Both of them seemed to be in a chamber
created by arrows and could not be seen. They were like the moon and the sun, enveloped during the monsoon.

' "Karna became wrathful in that battle and assumed a fiercer form. In every direction, he shrouded Pandava
with showers of arrows. O king! In that encounter, Pandava was enveloped by the son of the suta. However, like
the sun covered by clouds, he felt no pain. O venerable one! At this, Adhiratha's son laughed in the battle and shot
hundreds and thousands of nets of arrows. The arrows of the great-souled one seemed to cover everything in a
canopy of shade. Those supreme arrows were like clouds that were descending. O great king! The great-souled
Karna severed his bow. He laughingly brought his charioteer down from the seat on the chariot. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! With four sharp arrows, he killed his four horses and quickly dispatched them to Yama's
abode. O venerable one! Using his arrows, he swiftly shattered his chariot into tiny fragments and also destroyed
his flags, the ones who protected his wheels, his standard, his sword, his shield that was decorated with the signs of
one hundred moons and all his implements. O lord of the earth! His horses were slain. He was without a chariot.
He was devoid of his armour. He quickly descended from his chariot and stood there, with a club. O king! That extremely terrible club was raised. However, using hundreds and thousands of arrows, the son of the suta shattered it
into fragments. On seeing that he was without any weapons, Karna struck with many arrows with drooping tufts,
but made sure that he did not hurt him grievously. O king! Nakula was defeated in that battle by someone who was
powerful and was skilled in the use of weapons. With his senses afflicted, he suddenly fled. Radheya followed him,
laughing repeatedly. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! He placed the string of his bow around the neck
of the one who was running away[Karna gave word to Kunti that he would not kill any of the Pandavas, with the exception of Arjuna. That
promise has been described in Section 55 (Volume 4). The placing of the bowstring around the neck is a
sign of subjugation.]. Pulled by the string of the great bow around his neck, he was as resplendent
as the moon in the sky, surrounded by white clouds and decorated with Shakra's bow[Shakra's bow is the rainbow.]. Karna spoke these words
to him. 'The words that were spoken by you have been rendered futile. You have been repeatedly struck by me.
Can you cheerfully utter them again? O Pandava! Do not fight again with those who are your superior in strength.
O son! O Pandava! Fight with those who are your equals. Do not be ashamed at this. O son of Madri! Go home, or
go where Krishna and Phalguna are.' O great king! Having spoken these words, he released him. O king! Though
he could have been killed, the son of the suta did not kill him. O king! He remembered Kunti's words and abandoned him. O king! Having been released by the archer son of the suta, Pandava was ashamed and went towards
Yudhishthira's chariot. Having been tormented by the son of the suta, he ascended that chariot and sighed,
scorched by grief, like angry snakes inside a pot.

' "Having abandoned him in the battle, Karna swiftly advanced against the Panchalas. He was on a chariot with
dazzling flags and drawn by horses with the complexion of the moon. O lord of the earth! When they saw the commander[Karna.] advancing against the Panchalas on his chariot, a great uproar arose among the Pandavas. O great king!
The son of the suta caused carnage there. As the sun reached its midday spot, the lord roamed and wheeled around.
The wheels of chariots were shattered. The standards and flags of others were torn. O venerable one! The son of
the suta killed charioteers and shattered the wheels. We saw the dispirited Panchalas fleeing on their chariots.
Crazy elephants were terrified and roamed here and there, as if their limbs had been burnt by a conflagration in a
great forest. The temples of elephants were shattered and they exuded blood. Their trunks were severed. O venerable one! Their bodies and armour were mangled, their tails were sliced down. They were like dispelled clouds, destroyed by that great-souled one. There were other elephants that were frightened because of the iron arrows and
hundreds of spears. They advanced towards him, like insects towards a fire. We saw other giant elephants destroying each other. Blood flowed from their bodies, like water from the slopes of mountains. Horses lost their breastplates, the dressings on their tails and their silver, bronze and golden ornaments. Their coverings were destroyed
and they lost their bridles. Whisks, spreads and quivers fell down. Brave riders, the ornaments of a battle, were
killed. In that battle there, we saw supreme horses wandering around. O lord of men! We saw the best of warriors
who fought on horses, with lances, swords and scimitars. They wore armour and headdresses. They were destroyed. There were chariots embellished with gold, yoked to swift horses. With the rathas swiftly slain, we saw
them roaming around[Dragged around by the horses.]. O venerable one! Wheels and poles were destroyed for some, wheels were shattered for
others. There were others without flags and standards, or with their yokes destroyed. O lord of the earth! Deprived
of everything, we saw rathas wandering around in every direction, scorched by the arrows and weapons of Surya's
son[Karna, born from Kunti, was the son of the sun god, Surya.]. There were those without weapons. And there were many with weapons, but they had been killed. We saw
many foot soldiers from their side running around in every direction. They were adorned with colourful flags of
many different hues, decorated with bells. There were other warriors with severed head, arms and thighs. We saw
the arrows released from Karna's bow sever them. We beheld those warriors confront a terrible and great calamity.
They were killed by Karna's sharp arrows. In that battle, the Srinjayas were slaughtered by the son of the suta, as
they advanced towards him, like insects towards a flame. In every spot there, he consumed those arrays of maharathas and the kshatriyas avoided him, taking him to be the fire that comes at the time of the destruction of a
yuga. The remnants of the brave Panchala maharathas were routed and retreated. Karna pursued them from the
rear, showering arrows. They were devoid of armour and standards, but the spirited one pursued them. The maharatha son of the suta tormented them with his arrows. It was like the destroyer of darkness[The sun.] scorching beings
when it has attained midday." '
