Janamejaya said, 'My great grandfathers obtained heaven, the abode of the gods. What regions did the sons of
Pandu and the sons of Dhritarashtra obtain? I wish to hear about this. It is my view that you know everything.
You have obtained the permission of maharshi Vyasa, who was wonderful in his deeds.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Your great-grandfathers, Yudhishthira and the others, obtained heaven, the abode of the
gods. Listen to what they did. Having reached heaven, the abode of the gods, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira saw Duryodhana seated on a seat, blazing in prosperity. He was as resplendent as the sun and was covered with auspicious
marks that distinguish heroes. He was with other shining gods and sadhyas, the performers of auspicious deeds.
On seeing Duryodhana, Yudhishthira was filled with intolerance. Having seen Suyodhana's prosperity, he violently
retreated  and  spoke  these  words.  "I  do  not  desire  to  be  with  Duryodhana.  He  lacked  far-sightedness  and  was
greedy for the worlds. It was because of him that we had to kill all the well-wishers and relatives on earth. Earlier,
he had made us suffer in the great forest. Our wife, Panchali, was devoted to dharma and without a blemish in her
limbs. In the presence of our elders, he oppressed Droupadi in the midst of the assembly hall. O gods! Grant me
peace. I do not even wish to see Suyodhana. I wish to go to the region where my brothers are." Narada laughed and
replied, "It is not like that. O Indra among kings! For those who reside in heaven, all enmity is destroyed. O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! Do not speak in this way about King Duryodhana. Listen to my words. This King
Duryodhana is worshipped, together with the gods, by the virtuous ones, the best among kings and all those who
reside in heaven. Having offered his own body as an oblation in the battle, he has obtained the world meant for heroes. All of you were the equals of the gods and encountered him in the battle. By practising the dharma of kshatriyas, he has obtained this region. Confronted with great fear, this lord of the earth was not terrified. O son! You
should  no  longer  remember  what  occurred  in  the  course  of  the  gambling  match.  You  should  not  think  about
Droupadi's affliction. Nor should you remember the hardships others caused at the time of the gambling match.
Nor should you remember what happened elsewhere, in the course of the battle. You should follow propriety and
meet King Duryodhana. O lord of men! There is no enmity in heaven." Having been addressed by Narada, the intelligent Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, asked about his brothers and spoke these words. "Duryodhana was ignorant about dharma. He was wicked and destroyed the earth and his well-wishers. Yet, he has obtained the eternal
world meant for heroes. It is because of him that the earth was destroyed, with its horses, chariots and elephants. It
is because of him that we burnt with rage and were goaded towards enmity. My brave brothers were great-souled
and great in their vows. They were valiant and truthful in speech and abided by truthful pledges. Which are the
worlds they have obtained? I desire to see those. What about the great-souled Karna Kounteya, devoted to the
truth? What about Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna's sons? What worlds have been obtained by the
kings who followed the dharma of kshatriyas and were slain by weapons in the battle? O brahmana! O Narada!
Why don't I see those kings here? What about Virata, Drupada, the foremost Dhrishtaketu, Panchala Shikhandi, all
the sons of Droupadi and the unassailable Abhimanyu? O Narada! I wish to see them."'
