Vaishampayana said, 'On King Dhritarashtra's forceful command, Vidura started off towards the wise Pandavas,
on horses that were noble and strong, trained well and possessing great speed. He proceeded swiftly and came to
the king's[Yudhishthira's.] city and after being worshipped by the brahmanas, the immensely intelligent one entered. The palace
was like Kubera's abode and the one with dharma in his heart[Vidura.] went to Dharmaputra Yudhishthira. Ajatashatru,
the great-souled king who was always devoted to the truth, welcomed Vidura with due homage and worship and
then asked about the welfare of Dhritarashtra and his sons.

'Yudhishthira asked, "O Kshatta! I do not see your mind to be happy. I hope everything is well. Are the sons[Dhritarashtra's sons.]
obedient to their elders? Are the commoners obedient to his rule?"

'Vidura replied, "The great-souled king is well with his sons. Surrounded by his kin, he rules like Indra. O king!
Surrounded by his sons who are obedient, he is content. He is without worries and is firm in the desires of his own
heart. The king of the Kurus has first asked me to enquire about your health and welfare and then say, 'I have built
a sabha that matches yours. O son! Please come with your brothers and see it. O Partha! Assemble there with your
brother and have a game of dice with your well-wishers. We will be delighted at your arrival and so will all the
Kurus who are assembled there.' The great-souled King Dhritarashtra has assembled gamblers there[The word used is duradara. This means a gambler, which is probably what is intended. But the word also
means the stakes used in gambling and the box in which dice are kept.]. You will
see the rogues[This can also be translated as cheats.] assembled there. I have come here for this. O king! Agree."

'Yudhishthira said, "O Kshatta! Gambling can produce quarrels. Knowing this, which intelligent one will consent to gambling? What do you think is the right course of action for us? We are always obedient to your words."

'Vidura replied, "I know that gambling is the root of all misery. I made every effort to restrain him. However,
the king has sent me to you. O wise one! Knowing this, do what is best."

'Yudhishthira asked, "Other than the sons of King Dhritarashtra, who are the other rogues[Alternatively, cheats.] who are there to
play? O Vidura! I am asking you. Tell me. Who are the hundreds with whom one will have to play?"

'Vidura replied, "O lord of the earth! There is Shakuni, king of Gandhara. That king is eager to play, has a
skilled hand and knows the nature of the dice. There are Vivimshati, King Chitrasena, Satyavrata, Purumitra and
Jaya."

'Yudhishthira said, "It seems that some of the most feared rogues[Alternatively, cheats.] have assembled there. They are sure to
play with the powers of maya. However, everything is under the control of the creator. I will not refuse to play
with those rogues. O Vidura! I do not wish to go and gamble on King Dhritarashtra's command. A father always
has a son's welfare in mind. Therefore, tell me what I should do[The sense is that Vidura is like a father and Vidura will have the welfare of the Pandavas in mind. Therefore, Yudhishthira will agree because of what Vidura says, not because of what Dhritarashtra wants.]. I have no desire to gamble with Shakuni. But
if the confident[Alternatively, shameless.] one challenges me in the sabha, I will never refuse, because that has been my eternal vow."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having thus spoken to Vidura, Dharmaraja instructed that all the arrangements for the
journey should quickly be made. Next day, he set out with his army and his attendants, and with the honoured
Droupadi and other women of the household. "Destiny robs us of reason, like a glare falling before the eye[That is, robs the eye of sight.]. As
if tied in a noose, man follows the will of the creator." Uttering these words, King Yudhishthira set out with Kshatta. Partha, the destroyer of enemies, could not ignore the summons. He ascended the chariot given by Bahlika.
Partha Pandava, the destroyer of enemies, dressed in royal garments, left with his brothers. Brahmanas walked
ahead of him and his regal prosperity blazed. He was summoned by Dhritarashtra in accordance with what has
been decreed by destiny.

'Arriving in Hastinapura, he went to Dhritarashtra's palace. Pandava, the one with dharma in his heart, met
Dhritarashtra and Drona, Bhishma, Karna and Kripa. As is proper, the lord also met Drona's son[Ashvatthama.]. The mighty-
armed one then met Somadatta, Duryodhana, Shalya, the valorous Soubala and all the other kings who had assembled there before him, and Jayadratha and all the other Kurus. Surrounded by his brothers, the mighty-armed one
then entered the abode of the immensely wise King Dhritarashtra and met there Queen Gandhari, who was always
devoted to her husband. She was surrounded by her daughters-in-law, like Rohini[The fourth of the twenty-seven nakshatras, Aldebaran.] by the stars. After showing
homage to Gandhari and being welcomed by her in return, he saw his aged father[Dhritarasthra. The word father is to be interpreted in a broad sense.], the wise lord whose eyesight
was his knowledge[Because he was blind.]. O king! The king inhaled the fragrances of the heads[This has been translated literally and the gesture is a sign of affection.] of the descendants[The word used is nandana.] of the
Kuru lineage and of the four Pandavas[Yudhishthira has already been welcomed.], led by Bhimasena. O lord of the earth! On seeing the handsome Pandavas, tigers among men, all the Kouravas were extremely delighted. Taking their leave, the Pandavas entered their
houses, full of jewels. The women came to see them, Droupadi at their forefront. On witnessing Yajnasena's[Droupadi's name.]
blazing prosperity, Dhritarashtra's daughters-in-law were not enthused.

'After having conversed with the women, the tigers among men went out. They performed physical exercises
and the due rituals. After the daily rituals were over, they covered themselves all over with divine sandalwood.
When their minds were pure, the brahmanas pronounced benedictions on them. Having eaten the best of food, they
retired to their sleeping quarters. Women sung to them and the descendants of the Kurus went to sleep. They spent
the pleasant night in sexual pursuits. After resting for some time, they discarded their sleep[They awoke.] to the sound of
praises of bards. Having happily slept during the night, they performed all the daily rites in the morning and entered the beautiful sabha, crowded by rogues[The gamblers.].'