Souti said, 'When the Brahmanas were seated there in a circle, Ruru went into the deep forest and wept loudly.
Overcome with grief, his lamentations were piteous. Thinking and remembering his beloved Pramadvara, he
mourned. "She is lying on the ground, that slender-bodied beauty, increasing my grief and that of her relatives.
What can be more painful than this? If I have ever given alms, performed austerities, if I have shown respect to my
superiors, let those merits instil life into my beloved. If I have controlled myself from the day I was born, if I have
stuck to the prescribed rites, let the beautiful Pramadvara rise up right now." The messenger of the gods said, "O
Ruru! The words that you utter in your grief can have no effect. O righteous one! Someone whose mortal time on
this earth has run out, cannot come back to life again. The miserly life has run out for this daughter of the gandharva and the apsara. Therefore, do not yield even a little to grief. However, in advance, the great gods have devised
an antidote. If you wish to implement this, you will get back your Pramadvara." Ruru replied, "O traveller in the
sky! Tell me the details of the means the gods have provided for in advance. I will implement what I hear. Your honour, grant me deliverance." The messenger of the gods said, "O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Give up half of
your life to the girl. O Ruru! Your wife Pramadvara will rise up again." Ruru replied, "O best of the travellers in
the sky! I give up half of my life to the girl. Let my beloved arise, in the form and adornment of love." Then the
supreme king of the gandharvas and the supreme messenger of the gods together went to Dharmaraja[Yama, who rules over death.].

'They addressed him in these words. "O Dharmaraja! If you so think, let Ruru's beautiful bride Pramadvara,
who is now dead, arise with half of Ruru's life." Dharmaraja replied, "O messenger of the gods! If you so wish, let
Ruru's wife Pramadvara arise with half of Ruru's life." When he thus spoke, the beautiful lady Pramadvara, engaged to Ruru, arose as if from a slumber, endowed with half of Ruru's life. It was later seen in the future that the
illustrious Ruru gave up half of his long life for the sake of his wife and this shortened his own. Thereafter, on the
designated day, their respective fathers gladly married them in accordance with the rites and the couple passed
their days, devoted to each other. Having obtained a wife who was so difficult to get, beautiful and radiant as the
filaments of a lotus, the sage of firm austerities took a vow to destroy the snakes. Whenever he saw a snake, he was
possessed with terrible anger. If it was near, he always killed it with a weapon.

'O Brahmana! One day, Ruru entered a very large forest. He saw an old dundubha[A snake that is not poisonous.] lying there. With the intention of killing it, he then raised staff, like the staff of death and struck it. The dundubha then addressed the Brahmana. "O ascetic! I have not done you an iota of harm today. For what reason and in what violent rage do you wish
to do violence to me?"'
