Brahma said, "After this, I will tell you about the third and supreme quality. This is beneficial for all creatures in this world. This is the unblemished dharma followed by the virtuous. Joy, happiness, lack of terror, enlightenment, bliss, lack of niggardliness, lack of insolence, contentment, devotion, forgiveness, fortitude,
lack of violence, impartiality, truthfulness, uprightness, lack of anger, lack of malice, purity, skill, valour-those
who follow these in the practice of dharma, obtain the infinite in the world hereafter. Engaged in yoga, they think
that knowledge, conduct, service and effort are futile. Such a person has no sense of ownership. He is without ego
and without hope. He looks upon everyone equally. He is free from desire. This is the eternal dharma followed by
the virtuous. Confidence, modesty, patience, renunciation, purity, constancy, lack of violence, lack of delusion,
compassion, lack of injury towards creatures, joy, contentment, wonder, humility, good conduct, tranquility and
purity in deeds, auspicious intelligence, liberation, indifference, brahmacharya, detachment in every way, lack of
ownership, lack of hope and being surrounded by dharma-these are their traits. Such a person thinks donations,
sacrifices, studies, vows, receiving gifts, dharma and austerities to be futile[Because he has transcended the narrow forms of these.]. There are some people who have
sought refuge in satva and follow this kind of conduct. These brahmanas are patient, virtuous in their insight and
are situated in Brahma's womb. They have abandoned all kinds of sin. They are without grief. They are beyond old
age. They are immortal. The patient ones who act in this way obtain heaven. Through their minds, they possess the
powers of lordship, subjugation and lightness[Yoga leads to eight powers or siddhis. Three of these are mentioned here-power to become the lord of everything, power to subjugate everything and power to become weightless.]. Those great-souled ones behave like the gods in heaven. They are
said to move upwards and like the gods, can create. Having reached heaven, they can use their natures to modify
everything. They obtain everything that they desire and enjoy these. O bulls among brahmanas! I have thus told
you about sattva conduct. If one understands this in the proper way, one can obtain whatever one wishes. The qualities of sattva have specially been recounted. The conduct associated with these qualities has also been described.
A man who always knows these qualities enjoys these qualities. But the qualities do not enjoy him[He remains unattached.]."'"'