'Yudhishthira said, "There are those who are not tranquil, but seem tranquil in form. There are those who are tranquil, but have an appearance that is not tranquil. O father! How can we differentiate between such men?"

'Bhishma replied, "On this, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between a tiger and a jackal. O
Yudhishthira! Listen to it. In ancient times, there was a city named Purika. It was prosperous and the king was
Pourika. He was cruel and the worst among men, with an inclination to cause injury to others. When his lifespan
was over, he obtained an end that is not desired. Because of his wicked earlier deeds, he became a jackal. However, he remembered his earlier life and developed a supreme indifference. He did not eat flesh, even when it had
been brought to him by others. He was non-violent towards all beings. He was truthful in speech and firm in his
vows. He acted according to his wishes and his food became fruit that had fallen down. The jackal lived in a cremation ground and he liked this. He liked it because he had been born there and no other dwelling place appealed
to him. All the others of his species could not tolerate his purity. Though they addressed him respectfully, they
tried to make him budge from his intentions. 'You dwell in this terrible grove of our ancestors, yet you desire to be
pure. Since you are a flesh-eater, this is a perversity. Be like us. All of us will give you food. This is your food.
Therefore, enjoy it and give up this purity.' Having heard their words, he controlled himself. He used gentle and
respectful words that were not harsh, but were full of reason, to reply. 'Birth is not important for me. Lineage is
created by conduct. I desire for those deeds that will extend my fame. Even though I dwell in a cremation ground, I
am seeking to make myself tranquil through meditation. The atman leads to deeds. The ashrama is not an indicator
of dharma. While dwelling in a hermitage, one can kill a brahmana. Someone who does not dwell in a hermitage
can donate a cow. Is the first not a sin and is the act of donation going to be fruitless? Because of greed, all of you
are always engaged in eating. You do not see that you are confused and that you are bound down by these sins. I
do not believe in this conduct. This is wicked and reprehensible and takes a person away from the objective. It
leads to evil in this world and the next. Therefore, I do not like this conduct.'

'"There was a tiger that was famous for its valour. He formed the view that he[The jackal.] was pure and learned. He
showed him honour like the ones he himself received and thought that he would appoint him as his own adviser.

'O tranquil one! I know the kind of person you are. Come and spend your life with me. Enjoy the objects of pleasure you desire and do not touch the ones you dislike. We are famous as being fierce. If it is known that you are
with us, we will be known as gentle killers and that will be a desirable objective.'

'"He was honoured by the great-souled lord of the deer in these words. Exhibiting a little humility, the jackal
replied in these modest words. 'O king of the animals! The words that you have spoken to me are worthy of you.
You are searching for advisers who are pure and are accomplished in dharma and artha. O brave one! You are incapable of ruling this great dominion without an adviser, with a wicked adviser, or with one who seeks to physically
injure you. You should get advisers who are devoted to you, those who are not attached to anything else, those who
do not shout at each other, those who desire victory, those who are not covetous, those who are beyond deceit,
those who are wise, those who are engaged in ensuring welfare and those who are spirited. You should worship
these immensely fortunate ones like your preceptors and ancestors. O lord of animals! There is nothing that pleases
me more than my present satisfaction. I do not desire happiness, objects of pleasure, prosperity and your refuge.
My conduct will not gel with your earlier servants. They will find unhappiness in my conduct and cause dissension
between you and me. You are a refuge that is praiseworthy and I respect your radiance. You have cleansed your
soul and are extremely fortunate. You are not cruel even towards the wicked. You are far-sighted and great in endeavour. You are broad in your objectives and immensely strong. You are accomplished and all your acts are successful. Your thoughts serve to adorn you. However, someone like me is extremely content and serving another
will mean misery. I am inexperienced in serving another and roam around in the woods as I please. For all those
who dwell in a refuge with the king, their faults face his rage. A person who lives in the forest is alone. He is without fear and without any ties. If one is summoned by a king, there can be fear in the heart. But for someone who is
satisfied in the forest, subsisting on roots and fruit, there is nothing like that. Food and drink are easily procured.
On the other side, there is fear. Looking at these, I certainly think that happiness comes from withdrawal. Some
servants are punished by kings because of their crimes. But many more virtuous servants are harmed because of
false accusations and head towards destruction. Therefore, if the king of the animals thinks that I should perform
this task, I wish for an agreement about how I am going to be treated. You must honour what I say and you must
listen to my beneficial words. You must remain firmly established in the conduct that you have thought of for me. I
will never think of having consultations with any of your other advisers. Those others are politically wise and,
wishing to protect themselves, will speak false words about me. I will meet you alone and will privately tell you
what is good for you. For any tasks that concern your kin, you will not ask me what is good or bad. Having consulted me, you will not subsequently exhibit any violence towards your advisers. If you are enraged with my kin,
you will not bring them down by exercising the rod of punishment.' Thus addressed, the king of animals agreed
and honoured him. The jackal became an adviser in the tiger's abode.

'"On seeing that he was so well honoured and engaged in his tasks, the former servants hated him and repeatedly conspired together. They placated the jackal through signs of friendship and made him enter[Enter the group of wicked advisers.]. They were evil
in their intelligence and desired to make him a part of the wicked group. They had earlier got used to abducting the
property of others. However, now that they were controlled by the jackal, they were incapable of obtaining any of
these possessions. They wished to tempt him with accounts of upliftment. They sought to seduce his intelligence
with great riches. However, that immensely wise one did not deviate from his patience. Those others decided to
bring about his destruction and agreed on a plan. The king of animals desired meat that had been prepared well.
They stole it themselves and placed it in his[The jackal's.] house. He[The jackal.] knew everything about who had stolen it, the nature of
the plan and the reasons behind it. However, he remained tolerant because of the agreement he had made at the
time of agreeing to become an adviser. 'O king! If you desire my friendship, you will not pay heed to a false accusation.' At the time of the meal, the stolen meat could not be seen. The king of animals instructed that the thief
should be found. The deceitful ones described this to the king of the animals. 'Your adviser is learned and prides
himself on his wisdom. He has stolen the meat.' When he heard about the jackal's fickleness, the tiger was enraged. The intolerant king desired to have him killed. On detecting the opportunity, the former ministers said, 'He
is trying to shatter the means of subsistence for all of us. However, these deeds of his are protected because he has
your affection. O lord! But he is not the kind of person that you were told he was. His words suggest that he follows dharma. However, he is naturally cruel. This wicked one wears the deceit of dharma, but is actually false in
his conduct. For the sake of furthering his objectives and for the sake of his food, he has deceitfully followed these
vows.' On learning that the meat had been stolen and on hearing their words, the tiger instructed that the jackal
should be killed.

'"On hearing the tiger's words, the tiger's mother arrived there. She wished to speak some beneficial words and
make the king of animals understand. 'O son! You should not accept this. It seems to be full of fraud and deceit.
An honest person is being falsely accused by those who are dishonest. Those wicked ones have suffered from the
friction caused by his work. Those desiring to cause injury cannot tolerate any beneficial act. They seek to impute
taints to a pure person and bring him down. The greedy hate the pure and the weak hate the spirited. Stupid people
hate learned ones and poor people hate those who are extremely wealthy. Those who follow adharma hate those
who follow dharma and those who are ugly hate those who are handsome. Many learned people are greedy and all
of them earn a living through deceit. Wicked ones accuse an innocent person, even if he possesses Brihaspati's intelligence. When the meat was stolen, your house was empty. That virtuous one did not wish to touch it even when
it was given to him. Falsehood has the appearance of truth. Truth can seem to be like falsehood. Many kinds of
things can be seen, but they need to be examined. The sky seems to be flat. The firefly looks like a spark of fire.
But the sky is not flat, nor does the firefly have any fire. Therefore, unless there is a direct witness, everything must
be examined. If one does not determine the truth through examination, one is tormented subsequently. O son! This
is not a difficult thing to do, for a lord to get someone else killed. In this world, forgiveness is praised and brings
prosperity. O son! He was appointed by you and has become famous among the ministers. A capable person is obtained with difficulty and a well-wisher should be supported. If a person is otherwise pure, and is tainted because
one accepts the accusations of others, one taints oneself, as well as the minister, and is swiftly destroyed.' At this, a
person from the mass of the jackal's enemies presented himself. He had dharma in his soul and told him about the
deceit that had been committed.

'"Once his character was known, he[The jackal.] was honoured well and freed. The king of animals repeatedly embraced
him affectionately. The jackal was exteremely learned about the sacred texts. He was tormented because of the intolerance and, taking the permission of the king of the animals, wished to fast himself to death[Praya, practised when one has had enough of life and wishes to fast to
death.]. However, with
tears of affection flowing down from his eyes, the tiger restrained the jackal, who was devoted to dharma. He honoured him and was honoured back in return. The jackal looked at the tiger, who was overcome with affection. In a
voice that was choking with tears, he bowed down and spoke these respectful words. 'I was first honoured by you
and then later subjected to humiliation. You made an enemy out of me and I should not reside with you any longer.
All these only serve to further the cause of the enemy-those who are themselves dissatisfied, those who have
been dislodged from their positions, those who have been deprived of their honours, those servants who have
themselves brought about their downfall, those who have been brought down by others, those who are weak, those
who are greedy, those who are cruel, those who have been flung into prison, those who are proud and have lost
their possessions, those who are extremely spirited, but have lost the means, those who are tormented, those who
have decayed because of a flood of vices, those who are in hiding and those whose possessions have been seized.
You have humiliated me and subsequently wish to instate me. How can you trust me? How can I trust you again?
You took me to be capable. You instated me after examining me. You broke the pledge we had made and humiliated me. In the assembly, you spoke about me as a person with virtuous conduct. Had you protected the pledge, you
would not have spoken about my bad qualities. Since I have been disrespected, how can you have confidence in
me? I will also suffer from anxiety about you and not trust you. You will suspect me. I will be frightened and the
enemy will see this as a weakness. Those who are not content are very difficult to satisfy. This task will provide a
lot of scope for deceit. Those who have come together suffer when they are separated[These shlokas are cryptic and some liberty has been taken.]. Those who have come
together can also be separated with difficulty. When those who are separated are brought together, there is neither
love, nor affection. Sometimes, they are seen to be frightened of each other. While thoughts may focus on the
work, gentleness is extremely rare. It is extremely difficult to know about the minds of men, since they are both
stable and unstable. Among one hundred, one can find only one who is capable and strong. Suddenly, there is
something that makes a man rise to an eminent position. He acts with greatness, intelligence and dexterity, regardless of whether the situation is good or bad.' In this way, the jackal addressed the king with many words that were
full of dharma and artha, comforting and delighting him. The intelligent jackal then took his leave of the king of
animals. He seated himself in praya, gave up his body and went to heaven."'
