Vaishampayana said, 'Having made Uttara his charioteer and having circumambulated the shami tree, Dhananjaya
gathered all his weapons and marched out. The maharatha took down the banner with the lion and placed it below
the shami tree[Because that was Uttara's.]. He rode out with Uttara as the charioteer. He hoisted on the chariot the golden banner with the
mark of a monkey with the tail of a lion, one created with divine illusion by Vishvakarma[This was Arjuna's banner. Vishvakarma is the architect of the gods.]. He thought of the
favours of the fire god. Having divined his thoughts, he[The fire god Agni.] instructed those beings to be on the flag. Maharatha Bib-
hatsu Kounteya Shvetavahana was established on the colourful chariot, with a flag and quivers. He donned his
wrist guards and grasped his bow and arrows. With the supreme of monkeys on his banner, he set out in a northern
direction. The strong one, the destroyer of enemies, blew powerfully on his deep-sounding and large conch shell
and this made the body hair of his enemies stand up. At that sound, the swift horses knelt down on the ground. Uttara was terrified and sat down on the chariot. Kounteya Arjuna grasped the reins and made the horses stand up. He
embraced and comforted Uttara and said, "O foremost among princes! Do not be frightened. O scorcher of enemies! You are a kshatriya. O tiger among men! Why are you despondent in the midst of the enemy? You have
heard the sounds of conch shells before, as well as the loud sounds of kettle drums and the roar of elephants when
they are stationed in battle formations in armies. Why are you then so frightened by the sound of the conch shell?
Why is your form so despondent and why are you so terrified, as if you are an ordinary man?"

'Uttara replied, "I have heard the sounds of conch shells and the loud sounds of kettle drums, and also the roars
of elephants when they are stationed in battle formations in armies. But never before, have I heard the sound of a
conch shell like this. Never before, have I seen a banner like this. Never before, have I heard the sound of a bow
twanging like this. My mind is terribly agitated from the sound of this conch shell, the twang of the bow and the
roar of the chariot. I have lost sense of all the directions and my heart is trembling. The banner has covered everything and the directions are no longer evident to me. The sound of the Gandiva has deafened my ears."

'Arjuna said, "Stand firmly on this chariot and to one side. Place your feet firmly on it. Grasp the reins firmly. I
am going to blow the conch shell again."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The earth trembled from the sound of the conch shell, the roar of the chariot and the thunder of the Gandiva.

'Drona said, "From the roar of the chariot, the blast of the conch shell and the trembling of the earth, it can be
no one other than Savyasachi. Our weapons are no longer shining and our horses have lost their spirits. Although
there is kindling, the fires do not blaze. This does not augur well. All the animals are running towards the sun,
wailing terribly. The crows are alighting on our standards. This does not augur well. The vultures[Alternatively, birds in general.] are flying towards our left and this portends great danger. The jackals are howling and running around in the midst of the army
and are escaping uninjured. This portends great danger. I can see that your[Addressing Duryodhana.] body hair is standing up. The soldiers
have already been conquered and no one wishes to fight. Their faces are pale and all the warriors have lost their
senses. Let us let the cattle go. Let us stand here, armed and arranged in battle formations."'
