Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words from his son, Dhritarashta thought for a while and then spoke to
his son. Dhritarashtra said, "Pandu was always devoted to dharma. He always behaved respectfully towards his relatives, and especially towards me. I never knew him to care for food and other objects of pleasure. He was rigid in
his vows and gave me everything, including the kingdom. Pandu's son is as devoted to dharma as he was. He has
all the qualities, is famous in the worlds and is extremely respected by the citizens. How can we forcibly exile him,
especially since he has allies, from the kingdom of his father and grandfather? Pandu always took care of his advisers and his soldiers, especially their sons and grandsons. O son! Earlier, Pandu always took good care of the citizens of the city. For Yudhisthira's sake, why should they not kill us and our relatives?" Duryodhana replied, "O
father! I have thought about that danger also and have weighed it against the evil that will befall us. We must placate the people by offering them wealth and honour. They will then certainly side with us. O lord of the earth! The
advisers and the treasury are now under our control. Therefore, use some gentle means to remove the Pandavas to
the city of Varanavata. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When I am firmly installed as king, Kunti and
her sons can always return."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Duryodhana! The same thought has arisen in my mind too. But I could not reveal it because it was evil. Bhishma or Drona or kshatta[Vidura.] or Goutama[Kripa.] will never approve the banishment of Kunti's
sons. O son! In their eyes, we and the Pandavas are equals. Those wise and virtuous men will not tolerate any differentiation. O son! Why should we not deserve death[In case the banishing idea was implemented.] from the descendants of the Kuru lineage, those great-
souled ones and even inhabitants of the entire world?"

'Duryodhana said, "Bhishma will always be neutral. Drona's son[Ashvatthama.] is on my side. There is no doubt that Drona
will be on the side that his son is on. There is no doubt that Sharadvat's son, Kripa, will be on the side where those
three[Bhishma, Drona and Kripa.] can be. He will never forsake Drona and his sister's son[Ashvatthama.]. Though he secretly sides with others[The Pandavas.], kshatta's survival is linked to us. Even if he opposes us for the sake of the Pandavas, he will be able to do no harm.
Without any fear, banish Pandu's sons and their mother to Varanavata. Do it today and evil will not result. Through
this act, take away the terrible spike that is in my heart and the fire that burns me with grief and robs me of my
sleep."'
