'Sanjaya said, "Having defeated the Yavanas and the Kambojas, Yuyudhana, supreme among rathas, passed
through the midst of your soldiers and headed towards Arjuna. That tiger among men possessed arrows as his
teeth. His colourful armour was like a picture. He was like a tiger slaying deer and terrified the soldiers. As he traversed along the path on his chariot, he fiercely brandished his bow. It was extremely powerful and had a golden
back. It was decorated with golden moons. His armlets and helmet were golden and he was covered in golden armour. The brave one possessed a supreme golden standard that was as resplendent as Meru's summit. In the battle,
the circle of his bow had energy like that of the sun with its rays. He was like the sun when it has arisen in the autumn and, among those men, was as resplendent as the sun. The bull among men had the shoulders of a bull. He
was brave and had the eyes of a bull. He penetrated the midst of your soldiers, like a bull in the midst of cattle. He
was like a maddened elephant, advancing against another maddened elephant. He was like an elephant with shattered temples, stationed in the midst of a herd. Those on your side advanced against him in the battle, as if they
wished to be killed by a tiger. He passed through Drona's army and through the impenetrable army of Bhoja. He
passed through the ocean that was Jalasandha and through the army of the Kambojas. He crossed through that
ocean of soldiers and escaped from the makara that was Hardikya.

'"Satyaki was then surrounded by extremely enraged rathas from your side. There were Duryodhana, Chitrasena, Duhshasana, Vivimshati, Shakuni, Duhsaha, the youthful Durmarshana, Kratha and many other brave and invincible ones who were armed. As Satyaki proceeded, they angrily followed him from behind. O venerable one! A
great uproar then arose amidst your soldiers. It was like the ocean agitated by the force of the wind during the
night of the full moon or the new moon. The bull among the Shini lineage glanced at all those who were advancing
against him. He laughed and addressed his charioteer, 'Advance slowly. This army of Dhritarashtra's son is advancing against me. It is swiftly headed in my direction, with elephants, horses and infantry. O charioteer! All the
directions are resounding with the roar of chariots. The earth, the firmament and the ocean are trembling. O son! In
this great battle, I will counter this ocean of soldiers, like the shoreline resisting the abode of the waters, when it
swells at the time of the full moon. O charioteer! Behold my valour in this great battle, like that of Indra. I will
pierce the soldiers of the enemy with sharp arrows. Behold. In the battle, I will slay the infantry, horses, rathas and
elephants and pierce their bodies with thousands of my arrows that are like the fire.' While the infinitely energetic
Satyaki was speaking in this way, the soldiers quickly approached him, wishing to fight. 'Kill. Attack. Stay. Watch.
See.' These were the words those brave ones spoke. Satyaki killed three hundred horses and four hundred elephants with his sharp arrows. The encounter that ensued between him and those archers was tumultuous and led to
the destruction of men, like the famous battle between the gods and the asuras. O venerable one! Your son's soldiers were like a mass of clouds. However, Shini's grandson received them with arrows that were like venomous
serpents. O great king! Without any fear, in that battle, the valiant one shrouded them with a net of arrows and
killed many on your side. O Indra among kings! The spectacle that I witnessed there was supremely wonderful.
Not a single one of Satyaki's arrows was unsuccessful. That large ocean of soldiers was full of chariots, elephants
and horses and also full of foot soldiers and was forced to stand still when it encountered Shini's descendant as the
shoreline. The terrified men, elephants and steeds in your army advanced and were slain in every direction by the
arrows. They roamed around there, like cattle afflicted by the winter. We did not see any infantry, chariots, elephants, riders and horses that were not pierced by Yuyudhana's arrows. O king! Not even Phalguna had caused
such carnage amongst the army, as was caused by Satyaki. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Shini's
grandson surpassed Arjuna in the battle.

'"King Duryodhana pierced Satvata with three arrows, pierced his charioteer and struck his four horses with
four arrows. He then pierced Satyaki with three arrows and again struck him with another eight. Duhshasana
pierced the bull among the Shini lineage with sixteen arrows, Shakuni with twenty-five, Chitrasena with five and
Duhsaha pierced Satyaki in the chest with fifteen arrows. O great king! The tiger among the Vrishni lineage was
thus struck by their arrows and pierced each of them back with three arrows. The supremely energetic one severely
pierced them. Shini's descendant was dexterous and brave and roamed around in that battle, like a hawk. He severed Soubala's bow and his arm-guard. He pierced Duryodhana between the breasts with three arrows. The bull
among the Shini lineage pierced Chitrasena with a hundred arrows, Duhsaha with ten and Duhshasana with twenty.
O lord of the earth! Your brother-in-law[Shakuni.] picked up another bow and pierced Satyaki with eight arrows, following this up with another five. O king! Duhshasana pireced Satyaki with ten arrows, Duhsaha with three and Dur-
mukha with twelve. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duryodhana pierced Madhava with seventy-three arrows
and then used three sharp arrows to pierce his charioteer. All those brave maharathas made their efforts and Satya-
ki pierced them back with five arrows each. O lord! He used a broad-headed arrow to kill your son's charioteer[Duryodhana's charioteer.]
and bring him down on the ground from the chariot. O king! O lord of the earth! When the charioteer was killed,
the horses that had the speed of the wind and the soldiers bore the chariot away from the field of battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the king's chariot was running away, hundreds of your soldiers fled.
Satyaki enveloped them with sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. In every direction, he drove away all your soldiers. O king! Satyaki then advanced towards the chariot of the one with the white
horses. He released arrows and protected himself and his charioteer and those on your side honoured him."'
