Bhishma said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Later, King Janaka, with all his ministers and with his
priest at the forefront, came to the inner quarters. He brought an expensive seat and many kinds of jewels.
Bearing those offerings on his head, he approached his preceptor's son[Vedavyasa was Janaka's preceptor and officiating priest.]. He gave him the expensive seat. It was
decorated with many gems, was covered with spreads and cushions and was fortunate in every way[The seat is described as sarvatobbadra. This means fortunate in every-way, or in every direction. However, this
can also be interpreted as a square or circular seat.]. With his
own hands, the king received the seat from the priest. He gave it to Shuka, his preceptor's son, and worshipped
him. Krishna's son was seated there and honoured, in accordance with the sacred texts. Water to wash the feet was
offered first. A gift and a cow were given next. Following the prescribed rites and reciting the mantras, he accepted
the honour. Having received the honours, the supreme among brahmanas worshipped Janaka. Taking the king's
permission, he accepted the cow. The immensely energetic one asked the king whether he was well and in good
health. Shuka next asked about the welfare of the followers. Having taken his permission, the Indra among kings
and his followers seated themselves. The generous king joined his hands in salutation and sat down on the ground.
The king asked whether Vyasa's son was well and healthy. The king then asked why he had come.

'"Shuka said, 'O fortunate one! My father said that you are accomplished in the meaning of the dharma of moksha. He said that he is the officiating priest to the famous King Janaka of Videha. If I had any doubts in my heart,
he asked me to quickly go there. He said that you would sever my doubts about pravritti and nivritti. Instructed by
my father, I have come here to ask you. You are the foremost among the upholders of dharma. Therefore, you
should tell me. If a brahmana desires the objective of emancipation for himself, what are the tasks that he should
undertake? What are the tasks required for emancipation? Is it knowledge or austerities?'

'"Janaka replied, 'From the time of birth, hear about the tasks a brahmana must undertake. O son! When the sacred thread ceremony is over, he must devote himself to the Vedas. O lord! He must devote himself to austerities,
tending to his preceptor and brahmacharya. Without any malice, he must repay the debts to the gods and the ancestors. Having controlled himself, he must study the Vedas. Once this is over, he must take the preceptor's permission, offer a dakshina, and return. Having returned, with his wife, he must dwell in the state of a householder. He
must not go to anyone else[Any other woman.]. He must be free from malice and must possess the household fire. Having obtained
sons and grandsons, he must dwell in the ashrama of vanaprastha. Following the sacred texts, he must establish a
fire there and affectionately attend to the guests. In the forest, a person who knows about dharma ignites another
fire in his atman[This is a reference to the ashrama of sannyasa.]. He is without the opposite pairs of sentiments. There is no attachment in his soul and he
dwells in the ashrama that is devoted to the brahman.'

'"Shuka asked, 'If jnana and vijnana have been generated and if one can see the eternal in one's heart, is it necessary to reside in the ashrama of the forest? I am asking you about this and you should tell me. O lord of men!
Tell me the truth about the purport of the Vedas.'

'"Janaka replied, 'One cannot advance towards emancipation without jnana and vijnana. It has been said that
one cannot obtain jnana without association with a preceptor. It has been said that jnana is the boat and the preceptor is the one who steers the boat. After having obtained knowledge, one has accomplished one's objective. After
having reached the shore, one can abandon both[Jnana and tne preceptor.]. It has been said that the four ashramas of dharma and their
codes of conduct were thought of earlier, to prevent the destruction of the worlds and the destruction of rites. In the
course of progress, one performs many kinds of tasks. However, emancipation cannot be obtained in this world by
performing good or bad deeds. By thinking about the reasons through many births in this cycle of existence, one
can obtain a pure soul and attain emancipation even in the first ashrama. When one has obtained liberation in this
way, the learned person can see the purpose behind everything. For someone who desires the supreme in this way,
what is the purpose behind the other three ashramas? One must always discard the taints associated with rajas and
tamas. Perceiving the atman in one's atman[Respectively, the paramatman and the jivatman.], one must adhere to the path of sattva. One must see one's atman in
all beings and all beings in one's atman. However, one will not be attached, like an aquatic creature in the water. If
one is free from the body in this way, one is liberated and beyond opposites. One obtains tranquility. Like a bird,
one soars above the flood and obtains the infinite in this world. In ancient times, King Yayati sung a chant about
this. Listen. O son! This is upheld by brahmanas who are accomplished in the sacred texts of moksha. "The radiance exists in the atman and not anywhere else[The text does not clearly indicate the Yayati quote and our choice is subjective.]. Be attached to it. If one is extremely controlled in one's consciousness, one is capable of seeing it oneself. Such a person is not frightened of others and others are not frightened of him. He does not desire or hate. He then obtains the brahman. In deeds, thoughts or words, he does not entertain wicked sentiments towards any creature. He then obtains the brahman. He engages himself in austerities.
He discards the enticement of jealousy. He abandons desire and avarice. He then obtains the brahman. In words
and sight, he does not cause injury to any creature. He is impartial and beyond opposites. He then obtains the brahman. He looks upon praise and censure equally. He is indifferent to gold and iron, joy and misery, cold and heat,
good and evil, pleasant and unpleasant, birth and death. He then obtains the brahman." A tortoise extends its limbs
and then draws them back again. That is the way a mendicant restrains his senses and his mind. When a house is
enveloped in darkness, one can see with the light of a lamp. In that way, using the lamp of intelligence, one is capable of seeing the atman. O supreme among intelligent ones! I can see that you are already aware of all of this.
You also know the truth about everything else that there is to be known. O brahmana rishi! Through the favours of
your preceptor and because of his teachings, you already know about all these subjects. O great sage! It is also because of his favours that this divine knowledge has manifested itself before me and I know all this. Your vijnana is
superior to mine and your destination is superior to mine. Even if you do not realize it, your prosperity is superior
to mine. Though that vijana has been generated in you, you are not aware of its existence, perhaps because of
doubts associated with a young age, perhaps because of fear that you might not obtain emancipation. Through my
pure conduct, I may have been able to sever the doubts. With the bonds of the heart loosened, you will obtain the
objective. The vijnana has already been generated in you. You are firm in your intelligence and without avarice. O
brahmana! However, without the appropriate conduct, one cannot obtain the supreme. There is no joy or misery in
you. In particular, there is no greed. You are not interested in dancing and singing. No attachment was generated in
you. You are not bound down by relatives. You are not terrified of things that lead to fear. O immensely fortunate
one! I can see that you regard a lump of earth or iron and gold as the same. I and other learned ones can see that
you are established on the supreme path, which is without decay and eternal. O brahmana! All the fruits of the objective of moksha exist in you. O brahmana! What else do you wish to ask me?'"'
