Janamejaya asked, 'How did that eventful gambling match among the brothers take place, which caused so much
misery to my grandfathers, the Pandavas? O you who are immersed in the brahman! Who were the kings who were
present in that sabha? Who among them approved of the match and who did not? O brahmana! O supreme among
brahmanas! I wish to hear all this in detail, because this was the cause of the destruction of the world.'

The suta said, 'Having been thus addressed by the king, Vyasa's powerful student, knowledgeable in all the
Vedas, recounted everything as it had happened[Vyasa's student is Vaishampayana. Vaishampayana had recounted the story to Janamejaya. But it was retold
again in Naimisha forest by Lomaharshana's son Ugrashrava. The suta here is Ugrashrava, retelling the story for
the benefit of the sages.].'
Vaishampayana said, 'O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O great king! If you wish to hear it, then listen. I
will tell you in detail what happened. Knowing Vidura's views, Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, again privately
spoke these words to Duryodhana, "O Gandhari's son! Forget the dice, Vidura does not approve of it. The immensely intelligent one will not speak in vain. I think what Vidura has said is for my supreme welfare. O son! Act
accordingly, for I think that it will be for your welfare too. Vidura knows all the sacred texts, with their mysteries,
that the illustrious and wise[The word used is mahakavi, or great kavi. Kavi is a wise one, the meaning of a poet is a secondary one.] devarshi Brihaspati, preceptor of Vasava, taught to the intelligent king of the gods.
O son! I always follow his counsel. O king! The intelligent Vidura is considered as foremost among the Kurus, like
the immensely wise Uddhava is acclaimed among the Vrishnis. O son! Dissension brings destruction to the kingdom, so give up the idea. You have obtained what the supreme texts say are what a son should obtain from his father and mother. O son! You have obtained the rank of your father and grandfather. You have studied, you have become learned in the sacred texts. You have always been reared at home. You are the eldest among your brothers
and you have been established in the kingdom. Do you not consider this fortunate? You obtain the best of food and
garments, unobtainable by other men. O mighty-armed one! O son! Having obtained this, why do you grieve? O
mighty-armed one! This great kingdom of your father and grandfather is prospering. When you rule it, you shine
like the lord of the gods in heaven. I know you to be wise. Then what is the reason for this grief? Why is your misery swelling up? Tell me."

'Duryodhana replied, "I am an evil man that I eat and dress, despite what I see. It has been said that a man who
does not feel envy is a wretch. O Indra among kings! O lord! This ordinary prosperity does not please me. I am
miserable on seeing the blazing prosperity of Kunti's son. The entire earth is subject to Yudhishthira's suzerainty. I
am telling you that I am miserable, since I am still established here, alive. The Chaitrakis, the Koukuras, the
Karaskaras and the Lohajanghas live in Yudhishthira's abode, like prostrate slaves. The Himalayas, the oceans, the
regions along the shores that produce all the gems and all others are inferior to Yudhishthira's abode. O lord of the
earth! Since I was the eldest and foremost, Yudhishthira offered me homage and appointed me to the task of receiving the gems. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Of the riches that were brought there, supreme and invaluable, one could not see the near end, nor the far one. My hands were too tired to receive all those riches. When
those who had brought riches from distant places had left, I was still tired. Having brought gems from
Bindusarovar[Distant and divine lake.], Maya constructed a platform of crystal. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the place
full of lotuses, I took it to be water. On seeing me draw up my clothes, Vrikodara laughed at me. He thought me to
be devoid of riches and deluded by the superior wealth of the enemy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Had I
possessed the ability, I would have killed Vrikodara there. The derision of a rival burns me. O lord of men! I again
saw a similar pond full of lotuses. Thinking it to be made out of crystal, I fell into the water. At this, Krishna and
Partha[Presumably Arjuna.] laughed out loudly at me, and so did Droupadi and the other women. This pained my heart. My garments
having become wet, the servants gave me others on the king's[Yudhishthira's.] orders and this too made me more miserable. O
lord of men! Listen when I tell you about another trick. In trying to go out through what looked like a door, but
wasn't a door, I hit my head against a crystal slab and got hurt. Then, on seeing this from a distance, the twins were
amused. In great sorrow, they held me in their arms. Sahadeva then repeatedly told me, as if amazed, 'O king! This
is the door. Pass this way.' I saw jewels there, whose names I had not even heard of earlier. That is the reason why
my heart is burning."'
