Yudhishthira asked, "O foremost among the Bharata lineage! What is superior, conciliation or gifts? Tell me
which you think is better."

'Bhishma replied, "Some are pleased through conciliation, others are pleased through gifts. One must secure a
man's devotion after ascertaining his nature. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Listen to the qualities that
are associated with conciliation. The most terrible of creatures can be pacified through conciliation. In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. In a forest, a brahmana who was seized by a rakshasa was freed. There was an
intelligent brahmana. In a desolate forest, he confronted a catastrophe because he was seized by a rakshasa who
intended to eat him. However, he possessed intelligence and learning. Despite seeing that terrible creature, he was
not confused or distressed. Instead, he resorted to conciliation. Having honoured him with his words, the rakshasa
asked the brahmana a question. 'I will free you if you can answer my question. Why am I yellowish green and
lean?' The brahmana thought for an instant about the purport of the rakshasa's anxious question.

'"He then replied, 'You reside away from home. You are alone and without any of your well-wishers, though
you command an unmatched territory. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. O rakshasa! Though
you  are  virtuous,  there  is  no  doubt  that  your  friends,  because  of  their  own  wickedness,  have  acted  perversely
against you. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You possess an excess of prosperity and wealth
and you stupefy them with your supreme and excellent qualities. Nevertheless, they disregard you. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You have performed good deeds and possess the qualities. You can see that
they don't have the qualities. You are wise. They are foolish and uncontrolled in their souls. That is the reason you
are yellowish green and lean. Though you are afflicted because of lack subsistence, you have avoided the censured
means of subsistence. This has resulted from your greatness. There is no doubt that this is the reason why you are
yellowish green and lean. You have chosen to suffer because of your own noble qualities. But you are disregarded
by the others, who think that they have defeated you. O virtuous one! That is the reason you are yellowish green
and lean. There are those who suffer because they resort to deviant paths, overcome by the desire and the anger in
their souls. I think you are reflecting about those people. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean.
Though you have obtained everything, you have to adopt the form of one who has obtained nothing. Though you
are humble, those who are evil in conduct exhibit their intolerance towards you. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There was an enemy who arrived before you, pretending to be a friend. He first acted nobly.
Subsequently, he deceived you and left. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt that
you know about the purport and progress of everything that is manifest. You are skilled in the mysteries and accomplished. But those people do not honour you. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You remained among wicked people and spoke to them, clearing their doubts. Nevertheless, they did not praise your
qualities. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You do not possess riches, intelligence and learning.
Despite this, on the basis of your energy, you aspire to obtain greatness. That is the reason you are yellowish green
and lean. I think that you have controlled your soul and desire to roam around in this forest in the pursuit of austerities. But your numerous friends are not prepared to accept this. That is the reason you are yellowish green and
lean. At the right time, when you spoke excellent words amidst rich people, they were not applauded. That is the
reason you are yellowish green and lean. There is a stupid and angry person whom you love from your heart.
Though you have firmly instructed him and entreated him, you have been unsuccessful. That is the reason you are
yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt that someone urged you to undertake a task. But once the objective has
been attained, he is trying to appropriate it. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt
that your well-wishers only honour you for your own sake, ignoring the qualities that you naturally possess. Knowing this, you are yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt that you are ashamed. Consequently, you are unable
to divulge your intentions and desires. Therefore, you are lax in pursuing what you want. That is the reason you are
yellowish green and lean. In this world, there are many kinds of men, with diverse intelligence and inclinations.
You wish to persuade them with your own qualities, but are unable. That is the reason you are yellowish green and
lean. You are without learning. You are timid. You possess limited riches. You seek to obtain fame on the basis of
learning, valour and donations. There is no doubt that this is the reason why you are yellowish green and lean.
There is a fruit that you have desired for a long time, but have not been able to get. What you obtained was stolen
by others. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt that you are unable to see any
taints in yourself or anything wrong in what you have done. You are abused without reason. That is the reason you
are yellowish green and lean. Your well-wishers are miserable and afflicted. They lack riches and qualities and you
wish to free them from their destitution. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You see virtuous people in the householder mode and wicked people roaming around in the forest. Those who are emancipated have become attached to houses. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. The words you speak are full of
dharma and artha and are appropriate to the time and the place. But they are not accepted. There is no doubt this is
the reason why you are yellowish green and lean. You are learned. However, wishing to remain alive, you have accepted riches from a unaccomplished donor. There is no doubt that you are yellowish green and lean because you
accepted that. It is certain that when you are engaged in hunting, you can see wickedness flourish and the good suffer. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You wish to do what is agreeable towards well-wishers
who are in conflict and act against each other. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There are
learned and wise people who are unable to control their senses. I think that you reflect about their indulging in perverse deeds. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean.' Thus honoured, the rakshasa honoured the brahmana back in return. He made him a friend, gave him riches and released him."'
