Vaishampayana said, 'Having received Puru's youth, Yayati, Nahusha's son and the best of kings, was delighted
and indulged in pleasures-as he desired, as he could sustain, at whichever time he wished, and as it gave him happiness. O lord of kings! But he did nothing that was against dharma. He pleased the gods with sacrifices, the ancestors with shraddha ceremonies, the poor through charity, the Brahmanas by fulfilling their desires, the guests
through food and drink, the Vaishyas with protection, the Shudras with kindness and the dasyus with suppression.
Yayati pleased all his subjects by ruling according to dharma, like Indra himself. The king was as valorous as a
lion. He was young and enjoyed all the pleasures and unlimited happiness, but without transgressing dharma. The
king was extremely happy at these grand pleasures. However, the ruler of men was also despondent when he remembered that 1000 years would soon end. Knowing the measurement of time, the valorous one counted kalas and
kashthas.

'When the entire duration was complete, he called his son Puru and said, "O son! O vanquisher of foes! With
your youth, I have enjoyed pleasures-as I desired, as I could sustain and at whichever time I wished. O Puru! O
fortunate one! I am extremely pleased with you. Take back your youth now. Also take the kingdom, because you
are the son who has brought pleasure to me." Nahusha's son, King Yayati, then took back his old age and his son
Puru received back his youth.

'The king wished to instate his youngest son, Puru, as the king. But the four varnas, led by the Brahmanas, said,
"O lord! How can you instate Puru in the kingdom, overlooking your eldest son Yadu, who is Sharmishtha's son
and Shukra's grandson? Yadu is your eldest son. Turvasu comes after him. After him, there is Sharmishtha's son
Druhyu and then Anu and then Puru. How is it proper to pass over the elders and instate the youngest as the king?
In accordance with dharma, which you uphold, we wish to bring this to your attention." Yayati replied, "Listen to
my words, everyone from the four varnas, led by the Brahmanas, as to why the kingdom cannot be given to my eldest son. My commands were disobeyed by my eldest son Yadu. It is the opinion of the learned that a son who acts
counter to the father's wishes is no son at all. He is a son who follows the words of his mother and father for their
welfare. He is a son who acts like a son with his father and mother. Yadu has slighted me and so has Turvasu. I
have been extremely slighted by Druhyu and Anu. Puru is the only one who has specially followed my commands
and respected me. Though he is the youngest, he accepted my old age. Puru is like my true son; he did what I desired. Kavya Ushanas Shukra himself granted me the boon that a son who followed my instructions would become
the king and would rule over the earth. Therefore, I ask all of you to allow Puru to be instated as the king." The
people said, "It is true that a son who has all the qualities and always seeks the welfare of his mother and father
and respects them deserves to be the lord, even if he is the youngest. Since Shukra has granted this boon, there is
nothing that we can say." At these words from the citizens of the town and the country, Nahusha's son then instated his son Puru as the king.

'Giving the kingdom to Puru, he accepted the vows for departing to the forest and left his capital with the Brahmanas and the ascetics. Yadu's sons are known as the Yadavas, Turvasu's sons are known as the Yavanas,
Druhyu's sons are known as the Bhojas and Anu's sons as the mlecchas. Puru's sons are known as the Pourava lineage. O king! You yourself have been born to rule this kingdom for 1000 years.'
