'"Arjuna said, 'Out of compassion for me, the extremely secret adhyatma knowledge that you have stated has destroyed this delusion of mine. O one with eyes like lotus leaves! From you I have heard in detail about the creation
and destruction of all beings, and also your eternal greatness. O supreme lord! What you have said about yourself
is indeed like that. O supreme being! I wish to see your divine form. O lord! If you think that I am worthy of seeing that, then, O lord of yoga, show me your indestructible self.'

'"The lord said, 'O Partha! Behold my divine multi-dimensioned, multi-hued, multi-shaped hundreds and thousands of forms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! See the adityas, the vasus, the rudras, the ashvinis and the
maruts. 413 See the many wonderful things you have never seen before. O Gudakesha! In my body, in one place,
see the entire universe, with all that is moveable and immovable. Also see today, whatever else you want to see.
You will not be able to see me with your own eyes. Therefore, I am giving you divine sight. Witness my divine
glory.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O king! Having said this, Hari, the great lord of yoga, then showed Partha the divine and
supreme form-with many mouths and eyes, with many miraculous things to see, adorned in many resplendent ornaments, with many divine weapons raised, with divine garlands and clothing, anointed with divine fragrances, extremely wonderful everywhere, resplendent, infinite, with faces in every direction. If the brilliance of a thousand
suns simultaneously rises in the sky, then that brilliance can rival the brilliance of that great soul. Then Pandava
saw the entire universe in one place, divided into many parts, in that great god of gods' body. Then, amazed and
with his body hair standing up, Dhananjaya bowed down before the god with his head lowered and, with joined
palms, said...

'"Arjuna said, 'O lord! In your body I see all the gods and all the different types of beings, the divine sages and
all the serpents and the creator Brahma, seated on a lotus. O lord of the universe! O universal form! I see you, with
many arms, many stomachs, many faces and many eyes, everywhere. And I don't see an end, a middle or a beginning to you. With a crown, with a mace, with the chakra, resplendent everywhere, like a mass of energy, impossible to see, 414 brilliant like the burning fire and the sun, impossible to measure, I see you in every direction. I have
no doubt that you are eternal and supreme and the only thing worth knowing. You are the supreme refuge of this
universe. You are the indestructible and original being, the upholder of ancient dharma. I behold you without beginning, middle and end, infinite in strength, with uncountable arms, the sun and moon in your eyes, face like ignited fire, scorching this universe with your energy. O great soul! This space between the sky and the earth is pervaded only by you. The directions are also pervaded. Witnessing this miraculous and terrible form, the three
worlds are suffering. 415 That array of gods is entering you alone. Some are frightened and, with joined palms, are
craving protection. The array of great sages and pure souls are uttering words of pacification and are worshipping
you, with pure and profound prayers. The rudras, the adityas, the vasus and the saddhyas, 416 the vishvadevas, 417
the ashvinis and the maruts, those who partake warm food, 418 the gandharvas, the yakshas, the asuras and arrays
of the siddhas 419 are all gazing at you with amazement. O mighty-armed one! The worlds are terrified, and so am
I, at witnessing your great form, with many faces and eyes, many stomachs, many arms, thighs and feet, fearsome
with many teeth. O Vishnu! Touching the sky, resplendent, multi-hued, mouths stretched out, eyes large and fiery
-seeing you, I am frightened and I cannot maintain my fortitude and peace. Seeing your several faces, fearsome
with teeth and blazing like the fire of destruction, I have lost my sense of direction. I cannot find happiness. O lord
of the gods! O refuge of the universe! Have mercy. All those sons of Dhritarashtra, with the collected kings, and
Bhishma, Drona and that son of a suta 420 and the chief warriors on our side are dashing into your fearsome
mouth with the terrible teeth. Some of them can be seen, heads smashed and attached to the joints of the teeth. Truly, like many currents in rivers head towards and enter the ocean, thus, those warriors of this earth are entering
your mouths, flaming in all directions. As moths driven to destruction speedily enter a blazing fire, like that, these
people are also swiftly entering your mouths, for destruction. O Vishnu! In all directions, you are repeatedly licking, having swallowed all the worlds 421 with your flaming mouths. Your fierce resplendence is scorching, having
filled the universe with energy. Who are you? Tell me, you of the fierce form! I bow down before you. O great
god! Be merciful. I wish to know you, you who are the beginning. Because I do not understand your inclination.'

'"The lord said, 'I am the terrible destroyer 422 of people. I am now about to destroy these people. Even without
you, 423 all the warriors in the opposing army formations will not exist. O Savyasachi! Therefore, arise! Attain
fame. Triumph over enemies and enjoy the undisputed kingdom. These have already been slain by me. You will
only be the instrument. Kill Drona and Bhishma and Jayadratha and Karna and the other brave warriors also, already killed by me. Don't be apprehensive. You will be able to triumph over enemies in battle. Fight.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Hearing these words of Keshava's, the trembling Kiriti 424 joined his palms and saluting
Krishna, again said in a faltering tone, bowing down in fear...

'"Arjuna said, 'O Hrishikesha! It is natural that the universe is extremely delighted to hear of your glory and is
attracted to you, the rakshas are scared and flee in all directions and all the arrays of siddhas bow down. O great
soul! O infinite! O lord of the gods! O refuge of the universe! You are greater than Brahma and the original agent.
Why should you not be saluted? The manifest and the unmanifest and the indestructible 425 that is beyond, is also
you. You come before the gods. You are the eternal being. You are the abode of the universe after destruction. You
are the knower, that which is to be known and the supreme abode. By you is the universe pervaded and you are infinite in form. You are Vayu, 426 Yama, 427 Agni, 428 Varuna, 429 Shashanka, 430 Prajapati 431 and the greatgrandfather. 432 I salute you a thousand times. And again salute you. And yet again salute you. I salute you in
front and from the back. I salute you everywhere, in every direction. O possessor of infinite energy and unlimited
strength! You pervade everything. Therefore, you are everything. Without knowing your glory and also this, 433
inadvertently and in affection, thinking of you as a friend, expressions like O Krishna, O Yadava, O friend, have
been rudely used by me. O Achyuta! 434 At times of sport, sleeping, sitting or eating, alone or in front of other
equals, in jest, you have faced irreverence, and for that, I crave forgiveness from you, whose power is beyond
thought. O infinite power! You are the father, worshipped, teacher and also the greatest of all movable and immovable objects in the worlds. In the three worlds, there is no one equal to you. Where can there be someone greater
than you? O god! For that reason, I prostrate my body and bow before this revered god, craving your blessings.
Like a son's by the father, a friend's by a friend and a lover's by the beloved, forgive. 435 O god! Having seen that
which has not been witnessed before, I am delighted. But again, my mind is disturbed by fear. Therefore, show me
your earlier form. O lord of the gods! O abode of the universe! Be merciful. I wish to see your earlier form,
crowned, with a mace and chakra 436 in hand. O thousand-armed one! O universal form! Become manifest in your
four-armed form.' 437
'"The lord said, 'O Arjuna! Having been pleased, with my powers of yoga, I have shown this resplendent, infinite, primeval and supreme universal form. Apart from you, this has not been seen by anyone before. O great hero
of the Kuru lineage! Not through the Vedas, yajnas, study, nor through donations, nor even action or severe austerities, can this form of mine be witnessed by anyone other than you in this human world. Be not fearful at witnessing
this fierce form of mine. Be not bewildered. Overcoming fear, with a happy mind, may you behold that, my earlier
form."'

'Sanjaya said, "Having said this, Vasudeva again showed Arjuna his natural form. Having again assumed his
peaceful form, the great soul assured the scared Arjuna.

'"Arjuna said, 'O Janardana! Having seen your peaceful and human form, my mind is now calmed and I am in
control of my senses. I have become normal.'

'"The lord said, 'The form of mine that you have seen is difficult to witness. The gods themselves are always
desirous of seeing this form. Not through the Vedas, nor austerities, nor donations, nor even yajnas, is it possible to
see me in the form that you have seen me in. O scorcher of foes! O Arjuna! It is only through single-minded devotion that this form of mine can be truly known or seen, or it becomes possible to get immersed in me. O Pandava!
He who undertakes action for my sake, is attached to me, is devoted to me, is detached and without enmity towards
all beings, attains me.'"'
