'Satyaki said, "O Rama! This is not the time for lamentations. That time is past. Even if Yudhishthira does not say
anything, let us all act according to what must be done now. There are those in the world who have protectors.
They do not need to act themselves. O Rama! In all their deeds they have protectors, like Shibi and Yayati. O
Rama! There are those who have to act themselves, but in their deeds, they find protectors in this world. Those
brave ones among men are also protected. They never encounter difficulties, like those without protectors. The
Parthas have Rama, Janardana, Pradyumna, Samba and me, all capable of protecting the three worlds. How can it
be said that he and his brothers must live in the forest? It is appropriate that the army of Dasharha should march
out today, with many kinds of weapons and coloured armour. Let Dhartarashtra[Dhritarashtra's son, Duryodhana.] go to the eternal world of
Yama. Let all his relatives be overcome with Vrishni's strength. In your anger, you can encompass the entire earth,
not to speak of the wielder of the Sharnga bow[Sharnga is the name of Krishna's bow.]. Slay Dhartarashtra and all his relatives, like Vritra was destroyed by the great Indra, the king of the gods. Partha[Arjuna. Arjuna also taught Satyaki the art of war.] is my brother. He is my friend and my preceptor. He is
like Janardana's own soul. It is for this reason that the best time has come. Let us perform this great and difficult
deed. Through my supreme weapons, I will counter his[Duryodhana's.] shower of arrows. I will kill all of them in battle. O
Rama! With my supreme arrows, which are like the venom of serpents and the fire, I will forcefully slice off his
head from his body. With the force of strength, I will use my sharp sword to slice off his head from his body in battle. Then I will kill all his companions, Duryodhana and all the other Kurus. O Rohini's son[Rohini was Balarama's mother.]! I will take up my
weapons on the field of battle and bring joy to all the residents of earth. I will alone kill the foremost warriors
among the Kurus, like fire burns down straw at the great time of destruction. Nor will Kripa, Drona, Vikarna and
Karna be able to withstand the sharp arrows shot by Pradyumna. I know the valour of your son[Pradyumna is Krishna's son and this 'your' is being used in a general sense.]. I know the action of Krishna's son in battle[Since Pradyumna has already been mentioned, this means Samba. Samba was Krishna's son, through
Jambavati.]. Let Samba use the strength of his arms to subdue Duhshasana, with his chariot
and his charioteer. When he is maddened in battle, there is no one who can withstand Jambavati's son in battle.
When he was still a child, he suddenly destroyed Shambara's daitya army[It was Pradyumna, not Samba, who was kidnapped by the demon Shambara. Pradyumna was kidnapped
when still a child and eventually killed Shambara. This shloka probably belongs earlier, when Pradyumna's valour
is being described.]. Ashvachakra's thighs were round
and his arms were long and thick. He killed him in battle[Samba, not Pradyumna, seems to have killed Ashvachakra in battle. It is not clear who Ashvachakra was.]. Where is the man who can go elsewhere, once Samba has grasped him in his arms in battle? If the time has come, a man who is in the clutches of death can never escape. Like that, once one has entered the clutches of battle, who can escape with his life? The two maharathas
Drona and Bhishma, Somadatta surrounded by his sons, and all their armies, will be burnt down by Vasudeva's
flaming arrows. Who is there in all the worlds, including the gods, whom Krishna cannot withstand? When he
grasps his weapons and holds excellent arrows in his hand, when he holds the chakra weapon, he is invincible in
battle. Let Aniruddha[Pradyumna's son and Krishna's grandson.] hold his sword and shield in his hands. Let him bedeck the earth with Dhritarashtra's
sons-their heads severed from their bodies and dead, like a sacrificial altar strewn with kusha grass. Gada, Ulmuka, Bahuka, Bhanu, the youthful Nishatha-heroes in battle-Sarana and Charudeshna, who are maddened in battle-they must perform deeds that are deserving of their lineage. Let the brave kshatriya armies, with the foremost
among the Vrishnis, the Bhojas and the Andhakas, kill the sons of Dhritarashtra in battle and earn extensive fame
in this world. Let Abhimanu rule the earth as long as the great-souled Yudhishthira, supreme among the Kurus and
best among those who serve dharma, fulfils the oath he swore at the time of the game with the dice[Yudhishthira had sworn an oath that he would be banished and could not become king until that period was
over.]. After his
enemies are vanquished by the arrows we unleash, let Dharmaraja enjoy the earth. There will be no sons of Dhritarashtra and the son of the suta[Karna.] will be dead. This is our most important task and it will bring us fame."

'Vasudeva said, "O Madhava[Krishna is usually referred to as Madhava. The Yadavas are known as Madhava because one of their lines
was descended from Madhu. Thus Satyaki, and not just Krishna, is also Madhava.]! There is no doubt that what you have said is true. O one whose spirit is
strong! We accept your words. But the bull among the Kurus[Yudhishthira.] will certainly not wish for land that has not been
won through the strength of his own arms. For the sake of desire, or fear, or avarice, Yudhishthira will never abandon his own dharma. Nor will Bhima or Arjuna, or the atirathas the twins, or Krishna, the daughter of Drupada.
Both Vrikodara and Dhananjaya are unrivalled in war on earth. Why should he not rule the earth when he has
Madri's two sons worshipping him? When the great-souled lord of Panchala, the lords of Kekaya and Chedi[The Kekaya brothers were divided in the Kurukshetra War, with some on the side of the Pandavas and the
others on the side of the Kouravas. By the lord or king of Kekaya one means Vrihatkshatra, the eldest of the
Kekaya brothers who fought on the side of the Pandavas. By the lord or king of Chedi one means Dhrishtaketu,
Shishupala's son, who was instated on the throne after Shishupala's death.]
and we, march into battle together against the enemies, Suyodhana will depart the world of the living."

'Yudhishthira said, "O Madhava[Krishna.]! It is not surprising that you should speak in this way. I must protect my
truth more than my kingdom. Krishna alone knows what I am. I alone know what Krishna truly is. O Madhava! O
foremost among the Shinis[Yudhishthira is now speaking to Satyaki.]! When this foremost of men[Krishna.] knows that the time has come to display valour,
then you and Keshava will vanquish Suyodhana in battle. Let the warriors of Dasharha now depart. I stand firm
with my protectors and they are the protectors of the world of men. O you who cannot be measured! Stand fast in
dharma. I will see you again, when we assemble together in happiness."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then they greeted one another and showed mutual respect. They embraced the elders and
all those who were young. The foremost among the Yadus returned to their own houses and the king[Yudhishthira.] went on to
the tirthas. Having parted from Krishna, Dharmaraja went to the excellent tirtha constructed by the king of Vidarbha. He went and dwelt near Payoshni, whose waters were mingled with the soma juice that had been extracted
there.'
