'"Bhrigu said, 'Brahma Prajapati first created some brahmanas[These were the original rishis.]. They were created from
his energy and were like the sun and the fire in their resplendence. The lord Brahma then
created eternal truth, dharma, austerities, good conduct and purity, so that one could go to
heaven. O supreme among brahmanas! Without any sense of ownership, he then created
the gods, the danavas, the gandharvas, the daityas, the asuras, the giant serpents, the yak-
shas, the rakshasas, the serpents, the pishachas, men who were brahmanas, kshatriyas,
vaishyas and shudras and masses and masses of other beings. The complexion of brahmanas was white, while that of kshatriyas was red. The complexion of vaishyas was yellow, while that of shudras was black[It is possible that this is meant to be taken figuratively and not literally.
Brahmanas possessed the sattva quality, kshatriyas possessed the rajas
quality, vaishyas possessed a combination of sattva and rajas and shudras
possessed the tamas quality.].'
'"Bharadvaja said, 'If the distinction between the four varnas is only on the basis of
complexion and that is how the varnas are to be differentiated, then it is evident and can be
seen that among the varnas, there has been a mixture of varnas. Desire, anger, fear, avarice,
sorrow, anxiety, hunger and exhaustion influence everyone. How can varnas be differentiated on the basis of this? Sweat, urine, excrement, phlegm, bile and blood flow in the bodies
of everyone. How can varnas be differentiated on the basis of this? There are an infinite
number of mobile objects and so are the categories of the immobile. They have many different complexions. How can one determine their varna?'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'There is no special difference between the varnas. Everything in this
universe first consisted of brahmanas. Brahma created all of them earlier and they attained
varnas because of their deeds. There were brahmanas who loved desire and objects of pleasure. They were fierce and angry and loved courage. They abandoned their own dharma
and having turned red in their limbs, became kshatriyas. There were brahmanas who
earned a living from animal husbandry and subsisted on agriculture. They did not follow
their own dharma, turned yellow and became vaishyas. There were brahmanas who loved
violence and falsehood. They were avaricious and turned to all kinds of deeds to earn a living. They were dislodged from purity, turned black and became shudras. In this way, depending on their deeds, brahmanas became other varnas. Dharma, sacrifices and rites are
never forbidden to them[All the four varnas have a right to these.]. In this way, following the instructions of Brahma, all the four
varnas were created as brahmanas originally. But in their ignorance, some of them became
prone to avarice. Brahmanas who are devoted to sacred texts on dharma and austerities are
never destroyed. They always uphold the brahman and observe vows and rituals. There are
some who do not know about what Brahma created in ancient times. Among them, there
are many kinds of other species-pishachas, rakshasas, ghost and diverse kinds of mlecchas. Their jnana and vijnana has been destroyed. They try to act as they wish. There were
subjects who were created as brahmanas and determined to observe their own dharma.
Through their own austerities, these rishis then created others. However, their original creation was from that first god and had the eternal Brahma as the foundation. That creation is
known as mental and they were devoted to the strands of dharma[The apparent inconsistency is presumably resolved in the following way.
Brahma originally created the first rishis through his mental powers. The
others were directly born from them and were indirectly created by
Brahma.].'"'