Vaishampayana said, 'The supreme among brahmanas followed the rites and sacrificed the animals. Following
the sacred texts, the brahmanas then sacrificed the horse. O king! Following the rites, the bulls among the officiating priests then offered it to Drupada's daughter. O king! In the proper way, its parts were offered to the spirited
one. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Following the sacred texts, they plucked out the entrails. Again following
the sacred texts, they roasted the entrails and anxiously offered them. With his younger brothers, Dharmaraja inhaled the smoke. As is appropriate, this inhalation cleansed them of all sins. O lord of men! Together, the sixteen
officiating priests patiently offered the remaining limbs as oblations into the fire. When the sacrifice was completed, the king became as energetic as Shakra. O illustrious one! With his disciples, Vyasa enhanced the king's energy. As is proper, Yudhishthira gave the officiating priests one thousand crores of golden coins. To Vyasa, he gave
the entire earth. O king! Having accepted the earth, Vyasa, Satyavati's son, spoke to Yudhishthira, best among the
Bharata lineage and with dharma in his soul. "O supreme among kings! I have vested this earth in you. Give me a
price for this. Brahmanas always desire riches." With his brother and in the midst of those great-souled kings, the
intelligent and great-minded Yudhishthira replied, "In a great horse sacrifice, the earth is said to be the dakshina. I
have given away what Arjuna won and obtained for me. O Indras among brahmanas! I will enter the forest. Divide
the earth up among yourselves. Following the indications of a chaturhotra sacrifice[A chaturhotra sacrifice is performed by four priests.], divide up the earth into four
parts. O supreme among sages! I do not wish to take back what belongs to brahmanas. O unblemished ones! With
my brothers, this has always been my view." When he said this, his brothers and Droupadi also signified their assent. These replies made the body hair stand up. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At this, there were words of
praise from an invisible voice in the sky. In loud tones, the large number of brahmanas also praised this. In the
midst of the brahmanas, the sage Dvaipayana agreed to these words and honoured them. However, he again said,
"You gave it to me. But I am giving it back to you. Give gold to the brahmanas and let the earth be yours." Vasudeva then spoke to Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. "You should act as the illustrious Vyasa has said." Thus addressed, the
best of the Kuru lineage and his brothers were delighted in their minds. They gave away crores and crores of coins,
so that it was three times the normal dakshina at a sacrifice. In this world, no other man will be able to accomplish
what  that  lion  among  Kurus  did,  following  Marutta.  The  lord  Krishna  Dvaipayana  accepted  those  riches.  The
learned one divided this into four parts and gave it to the officiating priests. Having given away the gold, Yudhishthira bought the earth back. He was cleansed of his sins and conquered heaven. With his brothers, he was delighted. The officiating priests were satisfied with this collection of gold. According to desire and according to capacity, they divided this among the brahmanas. With Yudhishthira's permission, all the golden ornaments that were
there in the sacrificial arena, the gates, the stakes, the pots, the vessels and the bricks-all these were divided
among the brahmanas. After the brahmanas got what they wanted of the riches, it was the turn of the kshatriyas,
the large numbers of vaishyas and shudras and the other tribes of mlechchhas. It took a long period of time to divide up the gold there. All the brahmanas were delighted and returned to their abodes. The great-souled Dharmaraja satisified them with riches.

'The illustrious and immensely radiant Vyasa respectfully gave his own share of that great amount of gold to
Kunti. At having obtained this from her father-in-law, she was delighted. Pritha used it to perform great and auspicious deeds in this world. After the sacrifice, the king and his brothers bathed and were cleansed of their sins. He
was resplendent, like the great Indra among the gods. The Pandavas were surrounded by the assembled kings. O
great king! They were as resplendent as planets among large numbers of stars. They gave away many kinds of jewels  to  the  kings  and  elephants,  horses,  ornaments,  women,  garments  and  gold.  Having  given  away  that  large
amount of riches, in the congregation of those kings, King Partha was as beautiful and radiant as Vaishravana. He
summoned the brave King Babhruvahana. He gave him a large amount of riches and granted him permission to return home. O bull among kings! He cheerfully instated the child who was Duhshala's grandson in his own kingdom, the one over which his forefathers had ruled. In different categories, all the kings had been honoured. Having
expressed their subjugation to Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, they departed. Thus, the intelligent Dharmaraja's
sacrifice  was  performed.  There  were  copious  quantities  of  riches  and  jewels.  There  were  oceans  of  sura  and
maireya[Different kinds of liquor.]. There were lakes where clarified butter made up the mud. There were many mountains of food. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! The mire and the banks were made up of many kinds of tasty food. Many kinds of
sweetmeats were prepared and eaten. No end could be seen to the number of animals that were sacrificed. There
were young women who were intoxicated and maddened. They danced in delight. With the sounds of drums and
conch-shells, it was enchanting. Through day and night, there were incessant exclamations of "give" and "eat". It
was like a great festival and large numbers of people were happy. Men who came from many different countries
continued to talk about this. The best among the Bharata lineage showered torrents of wealth, objects of desire,
gems and riches. He was cleansed of his sins. Successful, he entered the city.'
