Dhritarasthra asked, "O Sanjaya! When all the soldiers had been killed by the sons of Pandu in the field of battle,
what did my remaining soldiers do? What about Kritavarma, Kripa and Drona's valiant son? What did evil-souled
King Duryodhana do then?"

'Sanjaya replied, "When the wives of those great-souled kshatriyas had fled and the camp was empty, those
three rathas were extremely anxious. They heard the sounds made by the victorious Pandavas. In the evening, they
saw that the camp was empty. They no longer wished to stay there and wishing to save the king, went towards the
lake. O king! Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, and his brothers were delighted in the battle. They roamed
around, wishing to kill Duryodhana. Desiring victory, they angrily sought to follow him. But though they endeavoured to search for him, they could not see that king of men. With the club in his hand, he had run away with great
speed and with his maya, had entered the lake and had made the waters solid[That is, after Duryodhana had entered the lake, he used his powers to
make the waters solid, so that, it no longer looked like a lake.]. The mounts of all the Pandavas became extremely tired. They returned to their camp and with their soldiers, rested there.

' "After the Parthas had left, Kripa, Drona's son and Satvata Kritavarma slowly went to the lake. They approached the lake where the lord of men was lying down. They addressed the invincible king who was sleeping in
the waters. 'O king! Arise! With us, fight against Yudhishthira. Triumph and enjoy the earth, or be slain and enjoy
heaven. O Duryodhana! All their soldiers have also been slain by you. O lord of the earth! The soldiers who are
left will also not be able to withstand your impetuosity. You will also be protected by us. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Therefore, arise.' Duryodhana replied, 'O bulls among men! This clash between the Pandus and
the Kouravas has been destructive for men. It is through good fortune that I see that you have escaped with your
lives. We will defeat all of them, but after we have got rid of our tiredness and our exhaustion. You are also exhausted and we are severely wounded. Their army is prospering. Therefore, I do not think we should fight now. O
brave ones! Since your hearts are large, the words that you have spoken are not surprising. You are also supremely
devoted to us. However, this is not the time for valour. I will rest for one night. Then, in the battle tomorrow, I will
fight with you against the enemy. There can be no doubt about that.' Having been thus addressed, Drona's son
spoke to the king, who was unassailable in battle. 'O king! O fortunate one! Arise. We will defeat the enemy in the
battle. O king! I swear on my religious rites, my donations, my truthfulness and my meditation that I will slay the
Somakas today. Virtuous people obtain delight from performing sacrifices. If I do not slay the enemy in the battle
before the night is over, let me not obtain that delight. O lord! Without slaying all the Panchalas, I will not take off
my armour. I am telling you this truthfully. O lord of men! Listen to me.' While they were conversing in this way,
some hunters came to the spot.

' "They were exhausted from carrying their burden of meat and wished to drink some water. O great king! O
lord! Every day, with supreme devotion, those hunters used to carry a load of meat to Bhimasena. While they were
concealed there, they heard all the words that were exchanged between them and Duryodhana. On finding that
Kourava was unwilling to fight, those great archers, who wished to fight, made great efforts to persuade him.
They[The hunters.] saw the Kourava maharathas there. Situated in the water, the king was unwilling to fight. O Indra among
kings! On hearing the conversation between them and the king, who was in the waters, the concealed hunters realized that it was Suyodhana who was inside the water. Some time earlier, while searching for the king, Pandu's son[Meaning Bhima.]
had arrived there and had asked them about your son. O king! On remembering the words of Pandu's son, those
hunters of deer softly spoke to each other. 'If we tell Pandava about Duryodhana, he will give us riches. It is evident that King Duryodhana is inside this lake. Therefore, let all of us go to the spot where King Yudhishthira is.
We will tell him that the intolerant Duryodhana is sleeping in the waters. Let us tell the intelligent Bhimasena, the
wielder of the bow, everything about Dhritarashtra's son sleeping in the waters. He will be extremely pleased with
us and will give us a lot of riches. Why should we exhaust ourselves with this dried out meat?' Having said this,
the hunters were delighted. Desiring wealth, they abandoned that burden of meat and headed towards the camp.

' "O great king! The Pandavas, strikers, had accomplished their objectives. But they did not see Duryodhana in
the battle. Desiring to ascertain the final destination of that wicked and deceitful one, they had dispatched spies in
every direction of the field of the battle. But all those soldiers had returned and told Dharmaraja that King Duryodhana could not be found. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words of the messengers, the king was
anxious and breathed heavily. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Pandus were thus distressed. O lord! At that
time, the hunters swiftly arrived at the camp, delighted because they had seen King Duryodhana. Though they
were restrained[Presumably by the guards.], while Bhimasena looked on, they entered. They approached the immensely strong Pandava Bhimasena and told him everything that they had seen and heard. O king! At this, Vrikodara gave them a lot of riches.
The scorcher of enemies went and told Dharmaraja everything. 'O king! Duryodhana has been discovered by my
hunters. You have been tormented because of him. He is sleeping in the waters and has turned them into stone.' O
lord of the earth! On hearing Bhimasena's pleasant words, Kounteya Ajatashatrua, together with his brothers, was
delighted. On hearing that the great archer had entered the waters of a lake, with Janardana at the forefront, he[Yudhishthira.]
swiftly went there. O lord of the earth! Loud sounds of joy arose among all the Pandavas and the Panchalas. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! They roared loudly, like lions. O king! All the kshatriyas swiftly rushed towards Lake
Dvaipayana. In every direction, the cheerful Somakas roared, 'Dhritarashtra's wicked son withdrew from the battle
and has been found out.' O lord of the earth! Speedily and swiftly, the chariots proceeded there and the tumultuous
sound that they made reached heaven. Yudhishthira wished to seek out Duryodhana and wherever he went, the
kings spiritedly followed him, although their mounts were exhausted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There
were Arjuna, Bhimasena, the two Pandavas who were Madri's sons, Panchala Dhrishtadyumna, the unvanquished
Shikhandi, Uttamouja, Yudhamanyu, the unvanquished Satyaki, the remaining Panchalas and Droupadi's sons.
There were all the horses and elephants and hundreds of foot soldiers. O great king! All of them went with Dharma's son.

' "Yudhishthira reached the lake known as Dvaipayana, where Duryodhana was. The waters were clear, cool and
pleasant to the heart and it was as large as the ocean. Through his maya, your son had solidified the waters and was
inside them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This was a wonderful act and could only be performed with divine powers. The lord of men was lying down inside the waters and was extremely difficult to see. O Indra among
men! The lord of men still held the club in his hand. King Duryodhana was residing inside the water and heard a
tumultuous sound, like the roar of a cloud. O Indra among kings! O great king! It was made by Yudhishthira and
his brothers, when they arrived to kill Duryodhana. There was the great roar of conch shells and the wheels of
chariots. A great cloud of dust arose and the earth trembled. O hearing the noise made by Yudhishthira's soldiers,
maharathas Kritavarma, Kripa and Drona's son rushed towards the king and said, 'Desiring victory, the cheerful
Pandavas are advancing here on their horses. Therefore, you should know that we are withdrawing ourselves from
this spot.' On hearing the words of those illustrious ones, the lord agreed, from inside the waters that he had turned
solid with his maya. O great king! Having obtained the king's permission, Kripa and the other rathas, severely oppressed by grief, went some distance away. O venerable one! Having travelled some distance, they saw a banyan
tree. They were extremely tired and rested under it, thinking about the king. 'Dhritarashtra's immensely strong son
is sleeping inside the waters, having solidified them. Desiring to fight, the Pandavas will reach that spot. How will
the fight take place? What will happen to the king? How will the Pandavas discover the Kourava king?' Thinking
about these and other things, they unyoked their horses from their chariots. O king! Kripa and the other rathas prepared to rest there." '
