'Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O grandfather! When the yugas progress and dharma
decays, when the world is afflicted by bandits, how should one establish oneself?"

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will tell you about the policy for times of calamity. At
such a time, the lord of the earth should conduct himself by abandoning compassion. On this, there is the example
of an ancient history. There was a conversation between Bharadvaja and King Shatruntapa. King Shatruntapa was
a maharatha from Souvira. He approached Kaninka[Kaninka is another name for Bharadvaja.] and asked him about his notion of artha. How can one obtain
something that has not been got? Having obtained it, how can it be increased? When it has increased, how can it be
protected? When it has been protected, how can it be used? The brahmana had determined the nature of artha.

'"When he was asked about his determination of artha, he spoke these words, full of reason, in reply. 'He[The king.] must
always raise the rod of chastisement. He must always exhibit his manliness. He must not have any weaknesses. He
must look towards the weaknesses of others, searching for openings. On seeing that the rod is always raised, people will be extremely frightened. Therefore, all beings must be restrained with the rod. This is praised by learned
people who have seen the truth. Out of the four, the rod is said to be the most important[Sama (conciliation), dana (gifts), danda (the rod/chastisement) and bheda (dissension) are
the four elements of policy.]. When the foundation
has been severed, all those who earn a living from it are also killed. When the root of a tree has been severed, how
can the branches remain? A learned person first strikes down the root of the enemy's side. After this, he makes all
the aides and the allies[Of the enemy.] follow him. At a time of difficulty, without thinking about it, he must follow good counsel, show great valour, fight well and retreat well. He must be humble only in his words. His heart must be like a
razor. He must first speak mildly, abandoning desire and anger. To accomplish an objective, he can have an alliance
with a rival, but must not trust him. Having accomplished the objective, a clear-sighted person will quickly withdraw from the alliance. Assuming the guise of a friend, the enemy must be assured through conciliation. But one
must always be careful about the enemy, since he is like a snake which has entered the house. If the intelligence of
the other person can be overwhelmed, he must be conciliated with what has already happened. If the other person
is not wise, he can be conciliated with the future. And a learned person can be conciliated with the present. If he[The king.]
desires prosperity, he must join his hands in supplication, take pledges, resort to conciliation, bow down his head at
the time of speaking and even shed tears. As long as the time of calamity continues, the enemy can be borne on the
shoulder. But when the right time arrives, he[The enemy.] must be smashed, like an earthen pot against a rock. O Indra among
kings! It is better to blaze for a short period of time like ebony, than to burn without smoke for a long period of
time, like chaff of grain. If one knows about the nature of artha, it is futile to associate with an ungrateful person.
Such a person only enjoys the riches and is disrespectful when the task has been accomplished. Therefore, in all
tasks, something must be left incomplete[If everything is completed, an ungrateful person will have nothing to look forward to.]. To ensure the best for himself, he must act like a cuckoo, a boar,
Mount Meru, an empty house, a predatory beast and an actor[He must be like a cuckoo in sweetness of speech, like a boar in destroying enemies, like
Meru in loftiness, like an empty house that offers refuge to everyone, like a predatory beast
in causing fear and like an actor in adopting different disguises.]. He must always be ready to rise up and go to the
house of the enemy. Even if the enemy is not well, he must ask him about his welfare. Those who are lazy, those
who are impotent, those who are proud, those who are scared of the disapprobation of people and those who are
perennially waiting, never accomplish their objectives. The enemy must not know about his weaknesses. But he
must know about the weaknesses of the enemy. He must protect his own weaknesses, like a turtle hiding its limbs.
Like a crane, he must think of accomplishing his objective[The crane waits patiently.]. Like a lion, he must show his valour. He must be like
a wolf in attacking. In running away, he must be like a rabbit. Drinking, gambling with the dice, women, hunting,
singing and musical instruments can be indulged in, but any addiction is sinful. The bow can be made to resemble
a blade of grass and he can sleep like a deer[In a time of distress, these are best interpreted as examples of deceit.]. He should be blind when it is best to be blind and he can even resort
to being deaf. A discerning person resorts to valour when it is the right time and the right place. If valour does not
pay heed to time and place, it is unsuccessful. He must think about the right time and the wrong time, about his
strengths and his weaknesses. He must engage himself only after he has discerned the relative strengths. Having
made an enemy bow down through the use of the rod, if a king does not restrain him, he is clinging to death, like a
pregnant she-mule[Because of the belief that a she-mule dies when she gives birth.]. A tree with many flowers may bear no fruit. A tree with fruit may be difficult to climb.
Sometimes, a mango may seem to be unripe, or cannot be shaken down. The hope should be appropriate to the
time and one must not engage oneself if there is an obstacle. The obstacle is due to a cause and he must speak
about the reasons that are behind those causes. As long as the reason for the fear has not presented itself, he must
seem to be frightened and seek to counter it. Once the fear is seen to have presented itself, he must fearlessly strike
against it. A man will not see anything fortunate as long as he does not surmount an uncertainty. If he surmounts
the uncertainty, if he remains alive, he will see the fortune. He must know about what has not yet come. He must
sever the danger that has presented itself. However, having pacified it, he must act so as to control it, in case it does
not decay, but grows again. When the time for happiness has presented itself, those who are intelligent do not think
it is good policy to shun it, in the hope of future happiness. A person may have an alliance with an enemy and
sleep, happily and trustfully. He is like a person who sleeps atop a tree and awakens only when he falls down. As
long as one is capable, whether the task is mild or terrible, one must uplift oneself and act in accordance with dharma. He must tend to all the rivals of his rivals. He must know his own spies and those engaged by the enemy. Spies
must be well-appointed in their tasks, in his country and in that of the enemy. Wicked men and ascetics must be
made to enter the enemy's kingdom. They act against dharma, are wicked in their conduct and are like thorns to
people[Spies sent by the enemy.]. They frequent gardens, pleasure grounds, watering places, dwelling houses for travellers, drinking houses, brothels, places of pilgrimage and assemblies. Knowing that they have come, he must control and pacify them.
He must not trust a person who should not be trusted. He must not even trust someone who should be trusted. Danger results from trust. One must not trust without examination. Having generated the enemy's trust through assertions of truth and reason, at the right time, when his[The enemy's.] position is somewhat unstable, one must strike back. He
must suspect even those who should not be suspected. He must always suspect someone who should be suspected.
There can be danger from someone who should be suspected and its root must be severed. Having generated the
enemy's confidence by not striking him, silence, ochre robes, matted hair and garments of hides, he must then leap
on him, like a wolf. For the sake of increasing prosperity, those who created obstructions in the way of wealth must
be slain-even if it is a son, a brother, a father, or a well-wisher. If there is an arrogant preceptor who does not
know the difference between what should be done and what should not be done, and has thus deviated off the path,
the rod must be used to chastise him. He must give his enemy gifts. But then, like a bird with a sharp beak, he must
rise against him and destroy all his riches. Without having pierced the inner organs, without having performed terrible deeds and without having killed like a fisherman, one does not obtain supreme prosperity. No one is born as
an enemy. No one is born as a friend. Depending on capacity and circumstances, one becomes a friend or an enemy. An enemy must not be freed, even if he is lamenting piteously. One should not grieve after having killed
someone who has caused an earlier injury. However, he must always act without malice and endeavour to accumulate and show favours. In a desire for prosperity, he must also endeavour to punish. Before striking, he must speak
pleasantly. After striking, it should be even more pleasant. If the head has to be struck down, he must weep and
sorrow. If he desires prosperity, he must placate the enemy, comfort him, show him honour and patience and give
him reasons for hope. One should not create enmity over minor matters. One should not try to cross a river using
one's arms. The eating of a cow's horn is a pointless exercise. One's teeth are ground down and no juices are obtained. The three objectives have three evils and three bonds[The three objectives are dharma, artha and kama. The bonds are addiction to the fruits these
lead to. The evils probably are-pursuit of dharma leads to neglect of artha, pursuit of artha
leads to neglect of dharma and the pursuit of kama leads to the neglect of both dharma and
artha.]. Knowing the bonds that can tie one down, one
must avoid the evils. A debt that is not repaid, a fire that has not gone out and an enemy who is not eliminated, repeatedly keep on growing. Therefore, even a trifle becomes difficult to resist. A debt that keeps on increasing and
an enemy who has been defeated can lead to terrible calamity, like a disease that is ignored. One must always be
careful and complete the task well. When a thorn is not properly cut out, it can create pain for a long time. The enemy's kingdom must be destroyed by killing the men, devastating the roads and destroying the mines. The king
must not be anxious and must be as far-sighted about the future as the vulture, as active as the dog, as valorous as
the lion, as sceptical as the crow and have a movement like that of the snake. He must seed dissension among the
foremost members of the groups and placate those who love him. He must protect the advisers and ensure that they
do not create dissension and opposition. He will be disrespected if he is mild. He will be hated if he is fierce. He
must be fierce at a time when fierceness is required and mild at a time when mildness is required. Mildness can be
used to kill those who are mild. Mildness can also be used to kill those who are terrible. There is nothing that cannot be obtained through mildness. Therefore, mildness is superior to fierceness. He must be mild at times and terrible at other times. In this way, his tasks become successful and he becomes superior to the enemy. When a learned
man is against him, he must not be reassured simply because that person is a long distance away. An intelligent
person has long arms and can be injurious, if he has been harmed. He must not cross when the other shore cannot
be reached. He must not take what can be seized back again.