Vaishampayana said, 'O intelligent one! Having spoken these words to Dhritarashtra, Vyasa departed. On hearing
these words, Dhritarashtra meditated on them. Having thought about them for some time, he sighed repeatedly. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! He asked Sanjaya, the one whose soul was controlled. "O Sanjaya! Those brave
lords of the earth are delighted at the prospect of battle. They wish to strike each other with different kinds of
weapons. For the sake of the earth, those lords of the earth are prepared to give up their lives. They will not be
pacified. They will strike each other to increase the numbers in Yama's abode. Desiring earthly prosperity, they
will not tolerate each other. O Sanjaya! Therefore, I think that the earth must possess many qualities. Tell me about
them. Many thousands, millions, tens of millions and hundreds of millions of brave people have gathered in Kurujangala[Literally, the forest of the Kurus. Another name for Kurukshetra.]. O Sanjaya! I wish to hear the exact details of the expanse of the countries and cities from which they
have come. Through the favours of the brahmana rishi Vyasa, whose energy is infinite, you possess the lamp of divine intelligence and the eyesight of knowledge."

'Sanjaya replied, "O immensely wise one! According to my wisdom, I will tell you about the qualities of the
earth. Behold them with the eyesight of the sacred texts. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I bow down before
you. There are two kinds of beings in this world, mobile and immobile. Depending on birth, mobile beings are of
three kinds-those born from eggs, those from sweat[Like insects.] and those from wombs. O king! Out of all mobile beings,
those born from wombs are the best. Of those born from wombs, humans and animals are supreme. O king!
They[Animals.] have diverse forms and are divided into fourteen groups. Seven dwell in the forest and seven live in villages[That is, they are domestic.]. O king! Lions, tigers, boars, buffaloes, elephants, bears and monkeys-these seven are said to be forest
dwellers. Cattle, goats, men, sheep, horses, mules and donkeys-these seven are considered to be village dwellers
by righteous ones. O king! These are the fourteen kinds of animals, domestic and wild. O lord of the earth! These
have been mentioned in the Vedas and sacrifices are established on them. Out of domestic ones, men are the best
and lions among wild ones. All beings sustain their lives by living on each other. Those that are immobile are said
to be udbhijas and these have five species-trees, shrubs, creepers, plants and those without stems, of the species
of grass[Trees are vriksha. Shrubs are gulma, they grow from a clump. Creepers are lata, they require a support. Plants
are valli, these are also creepers of a sort, but they creep along the earth (like pumpkins). These plants only survive for a year. Grass is trina.]. There are thus nineteen kinds[Fourteen mobile and five immobile.]. They have five universal constituents[The five constituents of matter-kshiti or prithivi or bhumi (earth), apa (water), tejas or agni (fire or energy),
marut or vayu (wind or air) and vyoma or akasha (the sky or ether). These are known as bhutas and pancha
(five) bhuta collectively.]. There are twenty-four all together. These are described as gayatri and this is known to the world[Gayatri has several nuances. It is a mantra in the Vedas and is described as the mother of the Vedas. It is equated
with the brahman or paramatman. In personified form, Gayatri is a goddess and Brahma's consort. She is equated with Brahma and is the source of all creation.]. He who truly knows all these to be the sacred gayatri, possesses all the qualities. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! He will not be destroyed. Everything is born from the earth. When destroyed, everything goes into the earth. All beings are established in the
earth. The earth is eternal. He who possesses the earth, possesses all the mobile and immobile objects in the universe. That is why the kings desire it and are prepared to kill each other."'
