Vaishampayana said, 'In similar fashion, after worshipping Dharmaraja, Sahadeva left for the south with a large
army. The lord first conquered the entire land of the Shurasenas[There is a geographical inconsistency, since the Shurasenas refer to the region around Mathura.]. The descendant of the Kuru lineage, supreme
among powerful ones, then subjugated the king of Matsya[Also known as Virata, in Rajasthan today.]. In a great battle, he defeated Dantavakra, emperor
among kings. Having forced him to pay tribute, he restored the throne to him. He then vanquished Sukumara and
King Sumitra and conquered the other Matsyas and the Patachcharas. The illustrious one swiftly conquered the
country of the nishadas and Goshringa, supreme among mountains. Then he defeated King Shrenimana. After conquering the new country, he marched against Kuntibhoja and he[Kuntibhoja.] happily accepted the suzerainty[Of the Pandavas.]. On the banks
of the Charmanvati[The river Chambal.] he encountered King Jambaka's son[The next sentence states that this son's name was Bhoja.], who had earlier been defeated by Vasudeva because
of an earlier enmity. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He instantly engaged in a battle with Bhoja and having
defeated him, marched towards the south.

'Having extracted tribute and many riches from them[There is a problem with the text of the critical edition here. It is not clear whom this tribute was extracted
from. Other versions have a sentence about Sahadeva defeating the Sekas. Had this sentence been included in the
critical edition, the tribute would have been from the Sekas.], he took all these and advanced towards the Narmada.
The powerful and valorous son of the Ashvins defeated in battle Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti[The country around the Narmada. Its capital was Ujjayini (Ujjain), also known as Avantipuri.], who were
surrounded by large armies. Having extracted riches from them, he advanced towards the city of Mahishmati[The capital of the Chedi kingdom, adjacent to Avanti. In today's Madhya Pradesh.].
The powerful Pandava Sahadeva, bull among men, engaged in battle King Nila there. The great battle struck terror
in the hearts of the fearful. It destroyed armies and threatened life. The illustrious god of fire provided succour to
his enemy. Horses, chariots, elephants, soldiers and armour from Sahadeva's army were seen to be blazing. The
mind of the descendant of the Kuru lineage was bewildered. O Janamejaya! He was incapable of giving a fitting
reply.'

Janamejaya asked, 'Why did the illustrious Agni become Sahadeva's adversary in war? O brahmana! He was
seeking to accomplish a sacrifice.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'It is said that the illustrious god of fire lived in Mahishmati and was once caught in an
act of adultery. In earlier times, after he had sported himself as he willed in the disguise of a brahmana, he was
brought before King Nila[The critical edition excises shlokas that give the story. Agni seduced King Nila's daughter and was caught in
the act.]. The virtuous king ordered him to be punished in accordance with the sacred texts and
the illustrious fire-god blazed up in anger. On seeing this, the king was surprised and bowed his head before the
wise one[Agni was in the form of a brahmana and the king did not recognize him.]. At this, the illustrious fire-god bestowed his favours on the king. The one who achieves the end of all
sacrifices offered a boon to the king and the lord of the earth asked for the boon that his forces might always be
free from fear. O king! Ever since then, whenever ignorant kings have tried to conquer that city, they have been
consumed instantly by the fire. O extender of the Kuru lineage! From that day, the women from the city of Mahishmati became unacceptable[As wives.]. Because of Agni's boon, the women could no longer be restricted[To one husband.]. They are their
own mistresses[The word used is svairini. This means a woman who is her own mistress and is unrestrained. But specifically,
it is used for a wanton or unchaste woman.] and act as they will. O supreme among men! O great king! From that day, out of fear of Agni, all
kings have avoided that kingdom.

'O king! The virtuous Sahadeva saw that his soldiers were engulfed in fear and surrounded by the fire, they
trembled like a mountain. He touched water and made himself pure and then spoke to Pavaka[One of Agni's names. Literally, the purifier.]. "O Pavaka! O
one with the black trails! I worship you and it is for your sake that I have undertaken this task. You are the mouth
of the gods. You are the sacrifice. You purify and you are the purifier. You are the bearer of sacrificial offerings. It
is from you that the Vedas have come into being and thus it is that you are known as Jataveda. O bearer of sacrificial offerings! Please do not cause an obstruction to this sacrifice." Having uttered these words, Madri's son spread
kusha grass on the ground. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In accordance with the prescribed rituals, that
tiger among men sat down before the advancing fire, before all his frightened and anxious troops. Like the great
ocean which does not cross the shoreline, the fire did not cross him. The fire approached Sahadeva, god among
men and descendant of the Kuru lineage, and spoke to him in affectionate words, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Arise. I acted thus only to test you. I know all your intentions and those of Dharma's son[Yudhishthira.]. O supreme
among the Bharata lineage! However, I am bound to protect this city, as long as there are heirs to carry forward
King Nila's lineage. O Pandava! However, I will accomplish what you desire in your heart." Then Madri's son
arose with a happy heart. Bowing his head and joining his hands in salutation, the bull among men worshipped
Pavaka. When Pavaka retreated, King Nila arrived and welcomed Sahadava, tiger among men and lord of all warriors. He[Sahadeva.] accepted the homage and made him a tributary. Then Madri's victorious son advanced in a southern
direction.

'He vanquished the immensely energetic Traipuras[This is not a reference to the Tripura that is towards the east. The Chedis were known as the Traipuras and
their capital was Tripuri.]. The mighty-armed one conquered the lord of Potana.
With a great deal of effort, the mighty-armed one then subjugated Ahriti, king of Surashtra[In today's Gujarat.], whose preceptor
was Koushika. While in the region of Surashtra, the intelligent one sent an ambassador to King Rukmin Bhishmaka of Bhojakata, who had great standing, was devoted to dharma and was a friend of Indra himself. O king! For the
sake of Vasudeva[Bhishmaka's daughter Rukmini was married to Krishna.], the mighty-armed king and his sons happily accepted the suzerainty.

'Taking a lot of riches, the lord of war went from there to Shurparaka and the region named Upakrita, ruled by a
clan. The immensely energetic and immensely strong one conquered them and the region of Dandaka[Land between the rivers Narmada and Godavari.]. The immensely wise one conquered and brought under his sway the kings who are born from mleccha wombs and live in
islands in the ocean, the man-eating nishadas, the Karnapravaranas, those known as the Kalamukhas and who are a
cross between men and rakshasas, all of the Kolla mountains, Murachipattana, the island known as Tamra, Mount
Ramaka and King Timingila. He used messengers to subjugate and obtain tribute from the forest-dwelling men
who had only one leg[This is a literal translation and clearly misses a nuance. For example, there may have been only footpaths in
the forest and ekapadi means a footpath. So ekapada might mean those who used footpaths, rather than men with
single legs.] and the cities of Samjayanti, Picchanda and Karahataka. Likewise, he used messengers to
subjugate and obtain tribute from the Pandya, the Dravidas, the Chodras[Perhaps the Cholas.], the Keralas, the Andhras, the Talavanas, the Kalingas, the Ushtrakarnikas, the Antakhis[Identified as residents of Antioch.], the Romas[Identified as residents of Rome.] and the city of the Greeks[The yavanas.]. O lord of
kings! Madri's intelligent son then went to Bharukaccha[Today's Gujarat.]. He sent envoys to the great-souled Poulastya Vibhishana[Ravana's younger brother, the son of the sage Pulastya.]. The conqueror of enemies and one with dharma in his heart[Sahadeva.] used conciliation and knowing this to be
determined by destiny, the intelligent lord[Vibhishana.] happily accepted the suzerainty and sent many kinds of riches-firstly
sandalwood and aloe, and then divine ornaments, expensive garments and priceless jewels.

'Then the powerful and intelligent Sahadeva returned. He thus subjugated with conciliation and conquest. After
making the kings pay tribute, the conqueror of enemies returned. O king! O Janamejaya! O bull among the Bharata
lineage! He handed all of this over to Dharmaraja and having accomplished his task, lived happily there.'
