'Yudhishthira asked, "To ensure the prosperity of men, what kind of a conduct should a lord of the earth follow?
How does he conquer the auspicious worlds? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king must donate and must perform sacrifices. He
must fast, perform austerities and be engaged in protecting the subjects. Following dharma, the king must always
protect all the subjects. Without being distracted, he must arise and worship all those who follow dharma. When
the king honours dharma, everyone also honours it in every way. When the king acts in this way, the subjects are
delighted. He must always hold his rod aloft and must be like death to his enemies. He must slay all the bandits
and must not wilfully ignore anyone. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If a king protects the subjects extremely
well, out of whatever dharma is observed by them, one-fourth of that dharma is the king's share. If he protects the
subjects in accordance with dharma, the king enjoys one-fourth of their studying, sacrifices, donations and worship. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If the king does not protect the subjects in any way and if there is something wrong with the kingdom, one-fourth of that sin is enjoyed by the king. It has been said that he gets all of it.
Some have determined that he gets half. However, there may be a lord of the earth who is cruel in his deeds and
false in his speech. Listen to how that king can be freed from his kingdom and his own treasury. If he cannot
restore all of it, he should restore whatever he can, keeping just enough for his own subsistence. All the varnas
must protect brahmanas and the property of brahmanas. One who causes injury to brahmanas should not be allowed to remain in the kingdom. If the property of brahmanas is protected, everything is protected. If their favours
are ensured, then the king will have accomplished his objective. Beings depend on Parjanya and birds on a large
tree. Like that, men depend on the king for accomplishing all their objectives. If a king has desire in his soul, is always fraudulent in his mind, or is violent and extremely avaricious, he will be incapable of protecting the
subjects."

'Yudhishthira said, "I have not sought pleasure in the kingdom. Even for an instant, I have not desired the kingdom. I agreed to the kingdom for the sake of dharma, but there does not seem to be any dharma in it. Since there is
no dharma in it, I have had enough of the kingdom. Therefore, for the sake of dharma, I will go to the forest. I will
conquer my senses and cast aside my rod. I will worship dharma in the sacred forest and, like a hermit, live on
roots and fruits."

'Bhishma replied, "I know your mind and about your qualities of non-violence. However, only through non-violence, you will not be able to accomplish anything great. You are mild, self-controlled, extremely noble and greatly
devoted to dharma. However, people do not show you great regard, taking you to be an eunuch, driven by compassion over dharma. Look towards rajadharma, which was appropriate for your father and grandfathers. What you
wish to resort to is not the conduct of kings. You have established yourself in non-violence and have thereby created the impotence you should not follow. There are fruits of dharma that can be obtained from protecting the subjects. O son[The word used is tata.]! What you wish to follow, through your wisdom and your intelligence, is not the blessing that Pandu and Kunti desired for you. Your father always spoke about valour, strength and spirit for you. Kunti desired
greatness, strength and generosity for you. In the worlds of men and gods, ancestors and gods always want offerings of svaha and svadha from their sons[The exclamation svaha is made when offerings are made to gods. The
exclamation svadha is made when offerings are made to ancestors.]. You have been born to practise donations, study, perform sacrifices
and protect the subjects and can either follow dharma or adharma. O Kounteya! Destiny has imposed a burden and
a heavier load has been imposed on that. Even if you are fatigued, your fame will not be destroyed. If a person
controls himself in every way and bears it without losing his footing, he is without any taint in his deeds, words
and success, because of his deeds alone. If someone knows about dharma and stumbles, that is a calamity, regardless of whether he is a householder, a king or a brahmachari. It is better to do a small, generous and virtuous act
than to do nothing at all. There is nothing more wicked than not doing. O king! When a person born in a noble lineage knows about dharma and obtains great prosperity, yoga and kshema exist and welfare can be thought of.
When a person who knows about dharma obtains a kingdom, he should seize it in every direction-winning over
some through donations, others through force, and still others with extremely pleasant words. There are learned
ones born in noble lineages, who are afflicted by fear because they may not have a means of sustenance. When
they obtain that[Because there is a king.] and are satisfied about their states, what can be a greater dharma than that?"

'Yudhishthira asked, "What is greater than heaven? What is greater happiness than that? What is supreme prosperity? If there is anything that you can think of, tell me about it."

'Bhishma replied, "If complete kshema can be obtained from someone being established[Referring to a king.], then among all of
us, he is the one who has obtained the best of heavens in an instant. I am telling you this truthfully. O supreme
among the Kuru lineage! You are the delight of all the Kurus. Be the king. Conquer heaven. Protect the righteous
and slay the wicked. O son! Let your well-wishers and the virtuous live and follow you. Be like Parjanya to beings
and like a succulent tree to birds. Be dignified, brave, capable of striking, non-violent, victorious over your senses,
affectionate and ready to share. Let people live and follow you."'
