'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Tell me the names of the varshas and the mountains. And tell me accurately about
those who dwell in the mountains."

'Sanjaya said, "To the south of Shveta and to the north of Nila, is the varsha named Ramanaka[The same as Ramyaka.]. Men who are
born there are white in complexion. All of them are extremely handsome to look at. The people born there are fond
of sexual pleasures. O great king! Happy in their minds, they live for eleven thousand and five hundred years. To
the south and to the north of Mount Shveta, is the varsha named Hairanyavat[The same as Hiranmaya.] and the river Hairanvati. O great
king! Everyone there is rich, handsome and a follower of the yakshas. O king! They are extremely strong and are
always delighted in their minds. O lord of men! The lifespan there is eleven thousand and five hundred years. O
lord of men! Shringavat has three peaks. One is made of jewels and another is extraordinary and is made of gold.
Another has jewels everywhere and is adorned with beautiful mansions. The goddess Shandili[Shandili was a female ascetic who lived on Mount Rishabha. The story of Garuda's encounter with her has been
described in Section 54 (Volume 4).], who illuminates
herself, always resides there. O lord of men! To the north of that peak and on the frontiers of the ocean, is the varsha named Airavata[The same as Ilavrita. This varsha is supreme because Mount Shringavan is there.], which is supreme because of Shringavan. The sun does not heat there. Men do not decay
there. The moon and the nakshatras cover[The sky.] and are the only source of illumination there. Humans who are born
there have the radiance of lotuses, the complexion of lotuses, eyes that are like the petals of lotuses and fragrance
like the petals of lotuses. They do not blink their eyes. Extremely fragrant, they do not partake of food and are in
control of their senses. O king! All of them have been dislodged from the world of the gods and are without sin. O
lord of men! O supreme among Bharatas! Men have a lifespan of thirteen thousand years there. The lord Hari
dwells to the north of the milky ocean, in Vaikuntha. His chariot is made out of gold and has eight wheels. It is
yoked to beings and has the speed of the mind. It has the complexion of fire and is extremely swift. It is embellished with gold. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He is the lord of all beings and all prosperity. He is finite and
infinite. He is the one who acts. He is the one who makes everyone act. O king! He is earth, water, sky, wind and
energy. He is the sacrifice for all beings. The fire is his mouth."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O lord of men! Having been thus addressed by Sanjaya, the high-minded king, Dhritarashtra, meditated about his sons. O great king! Having thought, he again spoke these words. "O son of a suta!
There is no doubt that time destroys the universe and creates everything again. There is nothing that is eternal.
Nara and Narayana know everything and hold up all beings. The gods call him Vaikuntha and he is known as Lord
Vishnu[Nara and Narayana are both manifestations of Vishnu. Vaikuntha means immeasurable and is the name of Vishnu's abode, as well as Vishnu's name.]."'
