Vyasa said, 'It[The atman.] is separate from the body and exists in a subtle form inside the body. Following the deeds
mentioned in the sacred texts, those who are conscious of the secret texts, can see it. When the rays of the
sun travel around, their coming and going cannot be seen. In that way, it is freed from the body and moves around,
but it is beyond human powers to detect this[The atman assumes a subtle body and moves around, outside the gross body.]. However, the sun's radiance can be seen in an image in the water.
In that fashion, the image of the soul can be seen in the gross body. In its subtle form, it is freed from the body.
Those who have controlled their senses and know about the truth can perceive this. Whether asleep or awake, they
always think about the atman. Primarily, they are free from opposites and abandon all tasks connected with rajas.
Day is like night to them and night is like day. These yogis always practice yoga and have their atmans under control[Interpreting, they have control over the subtle bodies.]. It is eternal. But because of qualities, it is not eternal in living beings. It is without birth and without decay
and roams around in subtle form, with those seven[The five elements, or senses, and mind and intelligence.]. If a man has not been able to conquer his mind and his intelligence even in his sleep, he distinguishes between his body and someone else's body and experiences happiness
and unhappiness. That is the reason he obtains misery. That is also the reason he obtains joy. He experiences anger
and greed and acting in accordance with these, faces calamities. In his dreams, he obtains great riches and performs auspicious deeds. But when he awakes, these cannot be seen. The extremely energetic atman is located in
the hearts of all beings. However, because of being enveloped with tamas and rajas, it cannot be seen in the bodies.
But there are those who are devoted to the sacred texts and yoga, searching for their own atmans. They look for
that other form, which is as firm as a vajra. Different beings have been created, with the four ashramas and their
tasks. But of these, yoga is the foremost and it takes one to the supreme brahman. Meditating, immersed in yoga
and tranquil, Shandilya spoke about the seven subtle ones and the six strands of Maheshvara[Shandilya was a famous sage. The seven subtle ones are interpreted as the senses, the objects of the senses,
mind, intelligence, mahat, prakriti and purusha. Maheshvara simply means great lord or great power. In this context, it does not necessarily mean Shiva. The six strands are interpreted as omniscience, contentment, infinite intelligence, impartiality, constant vigil and omnipotence.].'"'