'Satyaki said, "The way a man speaks, reflects the nature of his soul. The form of your words reflects the nature of
your soul. There are brave men and there are cowards. Both are firm distinctions and can be seen among men. A
eunuch and an extremely powerful man may be born in the same lineage, just as one branch of a tree yields fruit
and another one does not yield fruit. O one who bears the standard of a plough! I am not censuring the words that
you have spoken. O Madhava! I am censuring the ones who are listening to your words. In the midst of this assembly, without any fear, how can one speak the slightest evil about Dharmaraja? Those who were skilled with dice
challenged the great-souled one and defeated him. He was unskilled with dice and acted in accordance with faith.
How can this be a victory in accordance with dharma? Had they come to the house of Kunti's son while he was
playing with his brothers and defeated him there, that would have been a victory in accordance with dharma[A fine distinction is being drawn. In Section 27 (Volume 2), Yudhishthira told Vidura that he was under a vow
that he would not refuse to go if summoned to a gambling match. Had that match been held in his house, while he
was already gambling, that vow would not have come in the way.].
They challenged a king, who was always devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Then they defeated him through deceit[As described in the critical edition, there is nothing in Section 27 (Volume 2) which suggests that there was an
actual act of deceit.]. Can there be anything more supremely sacred than that? Having observed the supreme covenant, why
should he approach in obeisance? Having been freed from that exile in the forest, he has obtained his ancestral
share. Even if Yudhishthira were to desire someone else's property, it is not proper that he should ask for someone
else's property. Are they[The Kouravas.] acting in accordance with dharma, if they are not prepared to give up the kingdom? The
Kounteyas have passed the prescribed period of concealment. Though Bhishma and the great-souled Drona have
pleaded with them, they claim that they have been recognized[This jumps the gun and there is an inconsistency. Thus far, the Kouravas have not claimed this and the question
has not arisen.]. They are not prepared to give the sons of Pandu
their ancestral riches.

'"I will use the force of sharp arrows and persuade them on the field of battle. I will make them fall down at the
feet of the great-souled Kounteya. If they refuse to bow in obeisance before the wise one, they, together with their
advisers, will go to Yama's abode. They will not be able to withstand an angry Yuyudhana[Satyaki's name.] who is eager to fight.
Can the mountains withstand the force of a thunderbolt? Who can withstand the wielder of the Gandiva bow, the
one who uses the chakra in battle[Krishna.], me, or the unassailable Bhima? The twins wield firm bows and are extremely
radiant, the equals of Yama. If one wishes to live, can one approach Parshata Dhrishtadyumna[Parshata is Drupada's name and Dhrishtadyumna is Drupada's son.], or the five Pandavas who have extended Droupadi's glory? When they are intoxicated with pride, is there anyone who is equal to
the sons of Pandu in status or in valour? Soubhadra[Subhadra's son, Abhimanyu.] is a great archer and even the immortals find it difficult to
withstand him. Gada, Pradyumna and Samba are the equals of destiny, the thunderbolt and the fire. After killing
Dhritarashtra's son in battle, together with Shakuni and Karna, we will instate the Pandavas. There is no adharma
attached to killing an enemy who is an assassin[The word used is atatayin and is used for someone who commits a heinous crime, like a thief, a felon, an arsonist, a murderer, or a rapist.]. There is adharma and infamy in begging from enemies. Therefore, without any delay, let us satisfy the desires of his[Yudhishthira's.] heart. The Pandavas must obtain the kingdom that was
given to them by Dhritarashtra. Let Pandu's son, Yudhishthira, obtain his kingdom today, or let them all be killed
on the field of battle and go to sleep on the ground."'
