Sanjaya said, "O king! The Kurus[Meaning the Pandavas here. Kuru was a common ancestor, so the Pandavas could also be referred to as the Kurus.] were driven away by Karna, whose chariot possessed white horses. Using
great arrows, the son of a suta slew the sons of the Panchalas, like a storm dispelling large masses of clouds. With
an anjalika arrow, he brought down Janamejaya's charioteer from his chariot and killed his horses. He enveloped
Shatanika and Sutasoma with broad-headed arrows and severed their bows. In the battle, he pierced Dhrishtadyumna with six arrows and slew the horses that were on his right flank. The son of a suta next killed Satyaki's horses
and also slew Vishoka, the son of Kekaya. When that prince was killed, Ugradhanva, the general of the Kekayas,
attacked him. He used many arrows that were fierce and forceful and severely struck Karna's son, Sushena[However, we have earlier been told that Uttamouja killed Sushena.].
Karna laughed. Using three arrows that were in the shape of a half-moon, he severed his[Ugradhanva's.] arms and head. Having lost his life, he fell down from his chariot, like a decaying shala tree that is struck down with an axe. The horses of the foremost among the Shinis[Satyaki. We don't know how Satyaki's horses were killed.] had been slain. Sushena, the grandson of a suta, enveloped him with sharp
arrows and seemed to be dancing around. However, he was struck by the arrows of Shini's descendant and fell
down. When his son was killed, Karna became senseless with rage and wished to kill Shini's descendant, bull
among men. He said, 'O descendant of Shini's lineage! You have been killed.' He released an arrow that was capable of killing all enemies. Shikhandi severed it with three arrows and struck Karna with three more. Using large
arrows, he[Karna.] severed Shikhandi's bow and standard and then pierced Shikhandi with six fierce arrows. He next
severed the head of Dhrishtadyumna's son. Adhiratha's great-souled son then mangled Sutasoma with an extremely sharp arrow.

' "O lion among men! While that tumultuous battle was going on and Dhrishtadyumna's son had been killed,
Krishna said, 'O Partha! He is eliminating the Panchalas. Go and kill Karna.' Thus addressed, that foremost of
men laughed and advanced swiftly on his chariot towards the chariot of Adhiratha's son. The one with excellent
arms wished to save those who were frightened and were being killed[The Panchalas.] by that leader of rathas. He stretched
Gandiva with a twang that was loud and terrible. He rubbed the bowstring fiercely. He suddenly created darkness
with his arrows and destroyed elephants, horses, chariots and men. Bhimasena, the brave one among the Pandavas,
followed him on his chariot and protected his rear. Those two princes quickly advanced on their chariots towards
Karna, releasing arrows at the enemy.

' "During that time, the son of a suta fought mightily, crushing the Somakas in the battle. He destroyed large
numbers of chariots, horses and elephants and enveloped the directions with his arrows. Uttamouja, Janamejaya,
the enraged Yudhamanyu and Shikhandi united with Parshata[Dhrishtadyumna.]. They roared loudly and mangled Karna with
many arrows. Those five Panchala rathas attacked Vaikartana Karna extremely well, but were incapable of dislodging him from his chariot, just as the senses cannot overpower a patient and self-controlled person. Karna severed
their bows, standards, horses, charioteers, quivers and flags with his arrows and struck each of the five with arrows.
He then roared like a lion. As he struck them and there were the sounds of his bowstring, arrows, palms and the
bow, all beings were distressed. They thought that the earth, with its mountains and trees, was being shattered. His
bow was like Shakra's bow. Using that, Adhiratha's son shot fierce arrows. He was resplendent in the battle, like
the blazing solar disc, surrounded by a garland of rays. He pierced Shikhandi with twelve sharp arrows and the
ratha Uttamouja with six. He pierced Yudhamanyu with three sharp arrows and the sons of Somaka and Prishata
each with three arrows[Janamejaya is the son of Somaka and the son of Prishata (Drupada) is
Dhrishtadyumna.]. O venerable one! In the great battle, those five maharathas were defeated by the son of
a suta. They were rendered immobile by that scorcher of enemies, just as the senses are vanquished by one with a
controlled soul. They were submerged in the ocean that was Karna, like distressed merchants on an ocean. Droupadi's son rescued their maternal uncles[Because these warriors were from Panchala.] with well-prepared chariots, like providing boats on an ocean.

' "The bull among the Shini lineage used his sharp arrows to slice down the many arrows that Karna shot. He
struck Karna with sharp and iron arrows and pierced his eldest son[Vrishasena.] with eight arrows. Kripa, Bhoja[Kritavarma.], your
sons and Karna struck him back with sharp arrows. However, the supreme one amongst the Yadu lineage fought
with them, like the guardians of the directions fighting with the lords of the daityas. His bow roared continuously
and he showered down extremely fierce arrows. Satyaki became invincible, like the midday sun in the autumn sky.
Those rathas[The five warriors from Panchala.] armoured themselves well and again attacked, desiring to protect the foremost one from the Shini
lineage. The rathas from Panchala united in that great battle, like large numbers of Marut surrounding Shakra,
when he was afflicting the enemy. An extremely terrible encounter commenced between them and those on your
side who were engaged in your welfare. It was like an ancient one between gods and asuras and destroyed chariots,
horses and elephants. Afflicted by many types of weapons, chariots, elephants, horses and foot soldiers wandered
around. They struck each other and wavered. They uttered loud wails of lamentation and fell down, deprived of
their lives.

' "At that time, without any fear, your son, the younger brother of the king[Duhshasana.], showered arrows and advanced
against Bhima. Vrikodara spiritedly encountered him, like a lion leaping on a large ruru deer. The battle between
them was superhuman and was like a gambling match, with lives as stakes. They attacked each other fiercely and
angrily, like Shakra and Shambara in earlier times. They severely struck each other with extremely energetic arrows that were capable of ending lives. They mangled each other, like two mighty elephants that are overcome
with sexual desire and seek to indulge in intercourse[That is, they are fighting over the same she-elephant.]. With two kshurapra arrows, Vrikodara severed the bow
and the standard of your son. He struck him in the forehead with an arrow and severed his charioteer's head from
his body. The prince picked up another bow and struck Vrikodara with twelve arrows. He controlled the reins of
the horses himself and again rained down arrows on Bhima." '
