Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having heard the words of the rishi, Yudhishthira
sighed and thinking about performing rajasuya, could find no peace. He had heard about the glory of the great-
souled rajarshis and had learnt that they had attained the pure worlds through their deeds and sacrifices. In particular, he thought about rajarshi Harishchandra, who had performed the sacrifice, and thought about performing raja-
suya. Having honoured all those who were present in his sabha, and having been honoured by them in return, he
consulted them about the sacrifice. The lord of kings and bull among the Kuru lineage, after reflecting a great deal,
made up his mind to perform rajasuya. King Yudhishthira, protector of dharma, supreme among those who know
all dharma, attentive to his subjects and always acting for the welfare of everyone without distinction, extraordinary in his energy and power, reflected on what would bring welfare to all the worlds. Having thus conducted himself and having thus reassured everyone like a father, no one could be seen who hated him and he came to
be known as Ajatashatru[Shatru means enemy and ajata means not being born. So Ajatashatru means someone for whom no enemy has
been born, one without foes.].

'That supreme among eloquent ones assembled his advisers and brothers and repeatedly asked them about raja-
suya. Having been thus asked by the immensely wise Yudhishthira, who was eager to perform the sacrifice, the advisers then uttered words that were deep with meaning. "A consecrated king who wishes to achieve the characteristics of an emperor and attain the traits of Varuna, performs this rite, even though he is a king. O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! You are worthy of the status of an emperor and all your well-wishers think that the time has come
for you to perform rajasuya. The time for the sacrifice, in which priests rigid in their vows establish six fires[The six types of sacrificial fires are named agnishtoma, kshatradhriti, vyushti, dviratri, saptapeya and
saptadashapeya.] to the
chants of sama, is free and depends on kshatriya riches[That is, there is no need to wait for any prescribed date. Depending on one's powers, the sacrifice can be started immediately.]. At the completion of the sacrifice, after offering all the
oblations, the performer is consecrated as a universal emperor. O mighty-armed one! All of us serve you and you
are capable. O great king! Do not reflect any more and set your mind on the rajasuya." Separately and together,
thus did his well-wishers speak. O lord of the earth! Having heard these words, full of dharma, bold, pleasant and
supreme, Pandava accepted them in his mind. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having heard the words of his
well-wishers and knowing himself to be capable, he repeatedly reflected in his mind about rajasuya. The wise one
again consulted his brothers, great-souled priests and advisers like Dhoumya and Dvaipayana.

'Yudhishthira asked, "How can this great rajasuya, worthy of an emperor and one I wish to perform, be accomplished?" O lotus-eyed one! Having been thus asked by the king, they then spoke these words to Yudhishthira, the
one with dharma in his soul. "O king! You are learned in the ways of dharma. You are worthy of performing the
great sacrifice of rajasuya." When the priests and sages uttered these words, his advisers and brothers applauded
them. The immensely wise and self-controlled Partha, always desirous of the welfare of the worlds, thought again.
A wise one who considers his powers, capacity, time, place, income and expenditure and acts with complete deliberation, never perishes. He thought that a sacrifice begun only with his one desire might bring ruin. Carefully bearing the weight on his shoulders, his thoughts went out to Krishna Janardana, as the right person to decide the
course of action. Hari, supreme in all the worlds, is immeasurable, mighty-armed and without birth, born among
men only because of his own wishes. His feats rival those of the gods and there is nothing that is not the consequence of his deeds. There is nothing that he cannot bear. Thus it was that Pandava thought of Krishna. Having arrived at this final conclusion, Partha Yudhishthira, swiftly sent a messenger to one who was like his preceptor and
the preceptor of all beings.

'Riding a swift chariot, the messenger soon reached the Yadavas and the Dvaraka-residing Krishna in Dvaravati.
Hearing that Partha was eager to see him, Achyuta[Krishna.] was also eager to see him and went to Indraprastha with Indrasena[Indrasena is Yudhishthira's charioteer and is clearly the one who was sent as messenger.]. Travelling through many countries on the swift mounts, Janardana reached Partha in Indraprastha. Dharmaraja showed him homage in his house, like to a brother. So did Bhima. With a gladdened heart, he[Krishna.] then went to
see his father's sister[Kunti.]. After that he sported himself with his beloved well-wisher, Arjuna, and like a preceptor,
was worshipped by the twins. After he had rested himself in that pleasant place for some time and was refreshed,
Dharmaraja came to him and told him about his plans. Yudhishthira said, "O Krishna! I wish to perform rajasuya.
But it cannot be performed merely through my wishing it. You are omniscient. You are the one in whom everything is possible and you are the one who is worshipped everywhere. The king who is the lord of everything can
perform rajasuya. O Krishna! My well-wishers have said that I should perform it. But my final decision will certainly be in consonance with what you say. Out of friendship, some do not notice faults. Out of desire for riches,
some say that which is pleasant to hear. Some consider that to be the best course of action which brings them self-
gain. It is often seen that people's advice is like this. You alone are above all motives, beyond desire and anger.
You should tell me that which is supreme, for the welfare of the worlds."'
