'Narada said, "O king! In ancient times, in the era of the gods, the illustrious and indefatigable lord Aditya[Aditya is the son of Aditi and refers to gods in general. In this context, it means the sun-god.] descended from heaven to see the world of men. O Pandava[Yudhishthira.]! He had earlier seen the sabha of the self-creating
Brahma and in human form, described it to me, exactly as he had seen it. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O descendant of Pandu! When I heard about this celestial, immeasurable, indescribable and disembodied sabha, which
delights all living beings with its lustre and on learning about its qualities, I wished to see the sabha myself. O
king! I then spoke to Aditya. 'O illustrious one! I wish to see the grandfather's sabha. O lord of cattle[Gopati, or lord of cattle, a term also used for Indra, Krishna, Shiva and Varuna.]! Through
what austerities and what deeds can one see it? O illustrious one! Please tell me what herbs and what powers of
maya will allow me to set my eyes on that sabha.' O lord of men! Then the illustrious and valorous Surya[The sun-god.] took
me to Brahma's unblemished sabha, one that knows no fatigue. It is not possible to describe its form exactly. From
one moment to another, it takes on an indescribable form. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I do not know its
dimensions or its shape. I have never seen such beauty earlier. O king! That sabha always contributes to pleasure.
It is neither too hot, nor too cold. As soon as one enters, hunger, thirst and all types of fatigue disappear. It has
many different forms. It is beautifully coloured and resplendent. It is not supported by pillars. It does not decay
and is eternal. Its self-radiance surpasses that of the moon, the sun and the flaming crest of the fire. On the rafters
of the firmament, its radiance lights up the sun itself.

'"O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There sits the illustrious supreme god, the grandfather of all the
worlds. Through the powers of his maya, the lord himself, and alone, constantly creates all the beings-Daksha,
Pracheta, Pulastya, Pulaha, Marichi, Kashyapa, Bhrigu, Atri, Vasishtha, Goutama, Angiras, the mind, the sky,
knowledge, wind, energy, water, earth, sound, touch, form, taste and smell, the root cause behind creation and evolution of the world, the moon with the constellations, the sun with its rays, wind, seasons, resolution and breath.
Others too numerous to mention wait upon the self-creating one-artha, dharma, kama, bliss, hatred, austerities,
self-control. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Pandava! O lord of the earth! The gandharvas and the apsaras
go there together, and all the twenty-seven lords of the world[The twenty-seven nakshatras or constellations.], Shukra[Preceptor of the demons. But here, Venus.], Brihaspati[Preceptor of the gods. But here, Jupiter.], Budha[Mercury.],
Angaraka[Mars. Literally, the red-coloured one.], Shani[Saturn. The text actually says Shanaishchara, meaning the slow-moving one.], Rahu[This has no exact counterpart in the planets. Rahu is the demon that causes eclipses.], all the planets, mantra, rathantara[Here, mantra means a hymn from the Rig Veda and rathantara means a hymn from the Sama Veda.], Harimat[The meaning of Harimat isn't clear, though it might be a proper name.], Vasumat[Probably meaning wealth and riches, unless it is a proper name.], the Adityas
with their lord[Meaning Indra.], all the gods known by diverse double names[Mitra-Varuna being an example.], the Maruts, Vishvakarma, the Vasus, the classes of ancestors, all the sacrificial offerings, Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Yajur Veda, Atharva Veda, all the sacred texts,
histories[Itihasa, usually equated with the two epics.], the minor Vedas, all the Vedangas, cups for soma, sacrifices, all the gods, the distress-removing Savitri[That is, the Savitri mantra.], seven kinds of speech[The seven kinds of speech is a reference to languages spoken in seven different kingdoms, the languages
named after the kingdoms-Magadhi, Avanti, Prachya, Shouraseni, Ardhamagadhi, Bahlika and Dakshinatya.], understanding, perseverance, learning, wisdom, intelligence, fame, forgiveness,
sama hymns, songs of praise, different types of chants and commentaries with their arguments, in embodied form.
O lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There are kshana[Instant, measure of time equal to four-fifths of a second.], lava[Small measure of time, equal to one-sixth of a kshana.], muhurta[Small measure of time, but also forty-eight minutes.], day, night,
fortnights, months, the six seasons, years, the five yugas[This probably means the four yugas or eras, with the intervening periods counted as a fifth yuga.], the four types of day and night[The four quarters into which twenty-four hours are divided.], the divine wheel
of time that is eternal and indestructible, Aditi, Diti, Danu, Surasa, Vinata, Ira, Kalaka, Devi, Surabhi, Sarama,
Goutami, Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, Ashvins, Vishvadevas, Sadhyas, ancestors who are as swift as thought,
rakshasas, pishachas, danavas, guhyakas[Semi-divine species, followers of Kubera.], birds, serpents and animals. They worship the grandfather-the god
Narayana himself, devarshis, the Valakhilya rishis, those born from wombs and those born from without wombs. O
lord of men! Know that I have seen whatever exists in the three worlds, mobile and immobile, there. O Pandava!
The eighty thousand rishis who have controlled their seed and the fifty thousand rishis who have offspring, I have
seen these and the other dwellers of heaven go there, as they will. All of them worship him by lowering their heads
and return as they had come. O king of men! The illustrious and immensely intelligent Brahma, the grandfather of
the worlds, the self-creator who is infinitely radiant and merciful towards all beings, the soul of the universe, receives their homage and treats them as they deserve, with calm words, honour, riches and objects of pleasure-
gods, demons, serpents, sages, yakshas, birds, kaleyas[Demons, also referred to as the kalakeyas.], gandharvas and apsaras. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! O son! That pleasure-giving sabha is always agitated with the comings and goings. It is filled with every
form of energy, divine, served by masses of brahmarshis, radiant with Brahma's riches, extremely beautiful and the
dispeller of fatigue. O tiger among kings! Just as your sabha is unmatched among men, that sabha is likewise in all
the worlds that I have seen. O Pandava! These are the sabhas that I have seen earlier among the gods. Your sabha
is supreme to all in the world of men."

'Yudhishthira said, "O lord! O supremely eloquent one! From what you have described, it is as if the entire
world of kings is in Vaivasvata's sabha. O illustrious one! You have said that all the serpents, the lords of the
daityas, the rivers and the oceans are in Varuna's sabha. And that the yakshas, guhyakas, rakshasas, gandharvas,
apsaras and Shiva[The word used in the text is Vrishadvaja, meaning the one with the bull on his flag. Vrishadvaja is one of
Shiva's names.] are in that of the lord of riches[Kubera.]. You have said that the maharshis[Great rishis.], all the classes of
gods and all the sacred texts are in the grandfather's sabha. O sage! You have specifically listed that in Shatakratu's
sabha are the gods, the gandharvas and various maharshis. O great sage! You have said that only one rajarshi, Harishchandra, is in the sabha of the great-souled king of the gods. What were his deeds, traits, austerities and rigidity
of vows that this famous one alone rivals Shakra? O brahmana! When you went to the world of the ancestors, did
you see the immensely fortunate Pandu, my father? O illustrious lord! What did he say? I wish to learn. I wish to
hear all this, because my curiosity is great."

'Narada replied, "O lord of kings! O lord! Since you have asked me about the greatness of the wise Harishchandra, I will narrate it to you. He was a powerful king and sovereign over all the kings on earth. All the kings on
earth were under his rule. O lord of men! Riding alone on his invincible chariot that was embellished with gold, he
conquered the seven dvipas[The word dvipa means island. But it also means a continent or terrestrial region, the sense in which the expression is used here. With Mount Meru in the centre, the earth was divided into four, seven, nine, thirteen or eighteen dvipas, each dvipa separated from another with an ocean. Although the number of dvipas varies from description to description, seven is the usual number.] with the power of his weapons. O great king! Having conquered the entire earth,
with its mountains, forests and groves, he performed a great royal sacrifice. At his command, all the kings brought
riches to that sacrifice and waited upon the brahmanas. That lord of men happily distributed to the priests, then and
there, five times what they had asked for. When the rituals were completed, he gratified the brahmanas, who had
assembled there from various directions, with many types of riches. The brahmanas, gratified with many types of
food and delicacies, honoured with what they desired and satisfied with piles of gems, were satiated and said that
he was more energetic and more famous than all the kings. O Partha! O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Know that it is for this reason that Harishchandra shines more brightly than thousands of other kings. O lord of
men! Having completed his great sacrifice, the immensely powerful Harishchandra was instated in his kingdom
and looked radiant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whichever king performs the great rajasuya sacrifice[Royal sacrifice performed when a king instated himself as emperor over all other kings. An integral part of
a royal sacrifice was the payment of tribute by all other kings to the undisputed and universal emperor.],
blissfully spends his time with Indra after the consecration is over. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those who
do not flee on the field of battle and are killed, they too attain his abode and spend their time in bliss. Those who
give up their bodies after performing terrible austerities, they too go to that place and shine eternally.

'"O Kounteya! Your father Pandu, descendant of the Kuru lineage, was amazed on witnessing King Harishchandra's fortune. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! 'You can conquer the earth. Your brothers follow you. Perform
the great rajasuya sacrifice[This isn't Narada's message to Yudhishthira. It is Pandu's message to Yudhishthira, being conveyed through
Narada. The critical edition excises some shlokas available in other versions, where Pandu's request to Narada to
act as a messenger is explicitly mentioned.].' O Pandava! O tiger among men! Act upon that wish. With your ancestors, you
will then attain the great Indra's world. O king! It is said that this great sacrifice is constrained by many obstacles.
Brahma rakshasas[Brahma rakshasas are demons, but had been born as brahmanas. But they were evil, abducting other men's
wives or stealing the property of brahmanas. Consequently, after death, they become demons.], destroyers of sacrifices, look for holes. A war may follow it, leading to the destruction of
the earth[A war is likely, since other kings are forced to offer tribute.]. For a small reason, a terrible destruction may ensue. O lord of kings! Reflect on this and do what is
good for you. Always be watchful in protecting the four varnas. Grow prosperous. Rejoice. Gratify the brahmanas
with gifts. Thus have I described in detail all that you asked me to. With your permission, I shall now leave for the
city of the Dasharhas[The Dasharhas are the Yadavas and the city of the Dasharhas is Dvaravati or Dvaraka.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! O king! After having said this to Partha, Narada went away with all the
rishis with whom he had come. O Kourava! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Narada had left, Partha
and his brothers began to think about performing the supreme royal sacrifice.'
