'"Narada said, 'This is Shakra's beloved well-wisher and charioteer and his name is Matali. He is pure and of good
conduct and possesses all the qualities. He is energetic, valiant and strong. Apart from being a charioteer, he is
Shakra's friend and adviser. In battle after battle, there has been little difference in power between him and Vasava.
He drives the supreme chariot Jaitra, to which one thousand bay horses are yoked. Through his strength of mind,
he controls them in battles between the gods and the asuras. Vasava uses his strength to defeat others only after he
has vanquished them with his horses. The destroyer of Bala strikes with his weapons only after he[Matali. Indra is the destroyer of Bala.] has struck
first. He has a daughter with beautiful thighs. She is unsurpassed on earth in beauty. She is truthful and of good
conduct and has all the qualities. She is known by the name of Gunakeshi. O one with the radiance of an
immortal[Narada is addressing Aryaka.]! He has been searching in the three worlds. Your grandson Sumukha appeals to him as a husband for
his daughter. O Aryaka! O supreme among serpents! If this appeals to you, without any delay, make arrangements
for accepting this maiden. Like Lakshmi in the lineage of Vishnu, like Svaha in the lineage of the fire, may the
slender-waisted Gunakeshi be like that in your lineage[Lakshmi is Vishnu's consort, Svaha is the consort of Agni, the fire god.]. Therefore, accept Gunakeshi for the sake of your grandson. She is his equal in beauty, like Shachi is the equal of Vasava. Though he doesn't have a father, we choose him
as a groom because of his qualities and out of great reverence for you and Airavata. Sumukha possesses the qualities of conduct, purity, self-control and so on. Matali has come to you in person, ready to bestow his daughter. It is
proper that you should also honour him.'"

'Kanva said, "Aryaka was both happy and miserable. He was happy because of his grandson, but sad because
his son was dead. He told Narada, 'O devarshi! Do not think that I do not approve of your words. Who will not desire an alliance with Shakra's friend? O great sage! But I am hesitant on account of a weakness. O father[The word used is tata.]! My
immensely radiant son, who gave him his body, has been devoured by Vinata's son and we are miserable on that
account. O lord! When Vinata's son went away, he said, "I will devour Sumukha after a month." This will certainly
happen, because I know his determination. Therefore, my delight has been destroyed because of the words of Suparna.' Matali then told him, 'My mind has been made up. I have decided that Sumukha, born from your son, will
be my son-in-law. This serpent must come with me and Narada and go and see Vasava, the lord of the three worlds
and the lord of the gods. I will endeavour to find out how much of his lifespan remains. O supreme one! I will attempt to counter Suparna. Let Sumukha come with me to the lord of the gods, for the accomplishment of this task.
O serpent! May you be fortunate.' Then all of those immensely energetic ones went to see the immensely radiant
king of the gods, Shakra, where he was seated, together with Sumukha. The illustrious four-armed Vishnu also
happened to be there. Narada related everything about Matali. Vishnu then told Purana, the lord of the world, 'O
Vasava! Give him amrita and make him an equal of the immortals. Through your wish, let Matali, Narada and
Sumukha obtain their cherished desires.' Thinking about the valour of Vinata's son, Purandara told Vishnu, 'You
should grant it.' Vishnu replied, 'You are the lord of all the worlds and of everything that is mobile and immobile.
O lord! Who will dare to take back what you have given?' Thus did Shakra grant the serpent a supreme lifespan.
But the destroyer of Bala and Vritra did not give him amrita. On obtaining the boon, Sumukha's face became extremely radiant. He obtained a wife. And according to his desires, returned home. Having succeeded in their objective, Narada and Aryaka were delighted, and after honouring the greatly radiant king of the gods, departed."'
