'Bhima said, "O Yudhishthira! Gamblers have many courtesans in their country. But they are kind even towards
those, and do not stake them in gambling. In the gamble, we have lost to our enemies the riches and other excellent
objects that the King of Kashi brought, the gems and other gifts that the other lords of the earth brought, mounts,
riches, armour, weapons, the kingdom and even ourselves. Because you are our lord, my anger was not excited at
all this. But I think you committed a most improper act in staking Droupadi. She did not deserve this. After obtaining the Pandavas, this maiden is suffering this despicable and cruel oppression from the Kouravas only because of
your act. O king! It is because of her that my anger descends on you. I will burn your hands. O Sahadeva! Bring
the fire[Sahadeva is being asked because he kept the sacrificial fire for the Pandavas.]."
'Arjuna said, "O Bhimasena! Never before have you uttered words like these. The cruel enemies have destroyed
your pride in dharma. You should not make the desires of the enemy come true. Observe the supreme dharma. According to dharma, one should never cross one's elder brother. The king was challenged and he followed the dharma of the kshatriyas. He gambled because of the desires of the enemy. That is our great deed."

'Bhimasena replied, "O Dhananjaya! Had I not known that he has not done it for himself, I would forcibly have
grasped his hands and burnt them in the blazing fire."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing the Pandavas thus miserable and Panchali's affliction, Dhritarashtra's son
Vikarna spoke these words[Vikarna is one of Duryodhana's brothers.]. "O kings! Answer the question posed by Yajnaseni. If we do not decide on the
question, we will certainly go to hell. Bhishma and Dhritarashtra, the eldest among the Kurus, are here, but they do
not say anything. Nor does the extremely intelligent Vidura. Nor does Bharadvaja's son[Drona.], the preceptor to all of
us. Nor does Kripa. Why don't these best among brahmanas answer the question? The lords of the earth have assembled here from all the directions. Let them forget their desire and their anger and speak according to their own
thoughts. O kings! Reflect on the question that the beautiful Droupadi has repeatedly asked. Then answer as to
which side of the issue you are on." Thus did Vikarna repeatedly speak to all those who were present in the assembly hall. But none of the lords of the earth present said anything, good or bad. Vikarna again spoke to all those
lords of the earth. He rubbed his hands against each other, sighed and said, "O lords of the earth! O Kouravas!
Whether you say anything or not, I will tell you what I think is right. O best of men! It has been said that addiction
to hunting, drinking, gambling and sexual intercourse are the four vices of kings. The man who is addicted to these
deviates from dharma and the world does not approve of these improper deeds. This son of Pandu[Yudhishthira.] was addicted
to vice and challenged by deceitful gamblers, staked Droupadi. The unblemished one is common to all the Pandavas. Having first lost himself, the Pandava offered her as stake. Soubala, desirous of a stake, suggested Krishna.
Reflecting on all these, I do not think she has been won." On hearing these words, a great roar arose from all those
who were in the sabha. They approved of Vikarna and censured Soubala. When the noise died down, Radheya,
who was almost senseless with anger, gripped his lustrous arms[He grasped his own shining arms.] and uttered these words, "I have witnessed
many distortions in Vikarna. Like fire destroys the block from which it has been kindled, his destruction will come
from the fire he has created. Though urged by Krishna, those who are assembled here have not uttered a word. I
consider that Drupada's daughter has been won in accordance with dharma, and so do they. O son of Dhritarashtra!
Out of childishness, you alone are being torn to bits. Though but a child, you speak in this sabha what should be
spoken by elders. O Duryodhana's younger brother! You do not know the reality of what dharma is. Like one with
limited intelligence, you proclaim that Krishna has not been won, when she has been won. O Dhritarashtra's son!
How can you think that Krishna has not been won? In this sabha, the eldest Pandava staked everything he possessed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Droupadi is included in all his possessions. When Krishna has been won
in accordance with dharma, how can you think she has not been won? Droupadi was mentioned in the speech and
the Pandava approved. According to what reason do you then think that she has not been won? If you think that
bringing her into the sabha when she is clad in only a single garment is against dharma, listen to the words I have
to say in response. O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.]! It has been ordained by the gods that a woman should
only have one husband. However, she submits to many and it is therefore certain that she is a courtesan. It is my
view that there is nothing surprising in her being brought into the sabha in a single garment, or even if she is
naked. In accordance with dharma, Soubala has won all the riches the Pandavas possessed, including her and
themselves. O Duhshasana! This Vikarna is only a child, though he speaks words of wisdom. Strip away the garments from the Pandavas and Droupadi." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing these words, the Pandavas took off their upper garments and sat down in the sabha. O king! Then Duhshasana forcibly tugged at
Droupadi's garments. In front of everyone in the sabha, he forcibly pulled. O lord of the earth! As Droupadi's garment was being tugged away, another similar garment appeared every time[The critical edition excises some shlokas that exist in regional versions and in popular renderings of the story. Droupadi prayed to Krishna and he ensured that Droupadi wasn't stripped.]. At this, a terrible uproar arose. All
the assembled kings witnessed the most extraordinary sight in the worlds and approved. In the midst of the kings,
Bhima then kneaded his hands. His lips trembling with rage, he cursed in a loud voice, "O kshatriyas! O those who
live in this world! Hear these words of mine, never before uttered by any man and never to be uttered in the future.
O lords of the earth! Having uttered these words, if I do not act accordingly, may I never tread on the path followed by my forefathers. In battle, I will forcibly tear asunder the breast of this evil and misguided one[Referring to Duhshasana.], wretch
among the Bharatas, and drink his blood." On hearing these words, all the worlds were delighted. They worshipped him a lot and reviled Dhritarashtra's son. When that mass of garments was piled up in the middle of the
sabha, Duhshasana became tired and ashamed and finally sat down. On seeing the sons of Kunti in that state, all
the gods and men in the sabha raised cries of "shame", so that the hair on the body stood up. The people shouted,
"The Kouravas do not answer the question," and censured Dhritarashtra. Then Vidura, learned in all the ways of
dharma, raised his arms and silenced those who were in the assembly hall. He spoke these words, "Having raised
the question, Droupadi now weeps, like one without a protector. If those who are in the sabha do not answer the
question, dharma will be oppressed. Like a blazing fire, one in distress comes to this sabha. Those who are in the
sabha pacify him through true dharma. When a man in distress asks a question about dharma, those in the sabha
must answer that question, without being driven by desire or anger. O lords of men! Vikarna has answered the
question in accordance with what he thinks. You should also answer the question as you deem fit. If one seated in
the assembly hall does not answer the question, even though he knows about dharma, he incurs half the demerit
that comes from lying. And if one is seated in the assembly hall and answers the question falsely, even though he
knows about dharma, he certainly incurs the complete demerit that comes from lying. In this context, the learned
ones quote the ancient conversation that took place between Prahlada and the sage who was the son of Angirasa."

'Vidura said, "Prahlada was the king of the daityas and his son was Virochana. For the sake of a maiden, he[Virochana.]
quarrelled with Sudhanva, the son of Angirasa. We have heard that out of desire for the maiden, they wagered their
lives, each claiming that he was superior. When they were thus debating, they asked Prahlada, 'Who among us is
superior? Answer the question and do not lie.' He was scared of this dispute and looked at Sudhanva. As flaming
as the curse of a brahmana, Sudhanva angrily told him, 'O Prahlada! If you utter a lie or if you do not answer at all,
the wielder of the vajra will use the vajra to splinter your head into a hundred parts.' When Sudhanva spoke these
words, the daitya trembled like the leaf of a fig tree[The ashvattha tree.]. He went to the immensely energetic Kashyapa to consult
him. Prahlada said, 'O illustrious one! You are learned in the ways of dharma, for the gods, the demons and the
brahmanas. Listen to this problem and tell me what dharma is. Please tell me, because I am asking you. In the
hereafter, what worlds are attained by one who does not answer a question or answers it falsely?' Kashyapa answered, 'He who knows the answer to a question but does not answer it out of desire, anger or fear, brings upon
himself a thousand of Varuna's nooses. It takes an entire year for one of these nooses to be loosened. Therefore,
one who knows the truth should speak the truth openly. When dharma is pierced with what is not dharma and goes
to a sabha and those who are in the assembly hall do not take out the dart, it will pierce them. In a sabha where an
act of censure is not condemned, half the demerit is attached to the head of that assembly, one fourth to the culprit
and one fourth to those who do not condemn it. On the other hand, in a sabha where an act of censure is condemned, the head is free of sin and so are the ones assembled there, and demerit descends on the perpetrator. O
Prahlada! Those who answer falsely to a question asked about dharma, destroy the merits of good deeds for seven
generations of ancestors and seven generations of descendants. The grief of one whose property has been stolen,
whose son has been killed, who has lost all in debt, who has been extorted by a king, or of a woman who has no
husband, or of one distanced from his companions, or the misery of a co-wife, or of one deprived because of witnesses[The witnesses are false witnesses.]-the lord of the thirty gods[Indra.] has declared these miseries to be equal. He who speaks falsely obtains
all these miseries. One becomes a witness because of what he has directly seen, heard or understood. Therefore, a
witness who speaks the truth never deviates from dharma and artha.' Having heard Kashyapa's words, Prahlada
spoke to his son. 'Sudhanva is superior to you, just as Angirasa is superior to me. Sudhanva's mother is superior to
your mother. O Virochana! Sudhanva is the lord of your life.' Sudhanva replied, 'Since you have not deviated from
dharma out of affection towards your son, I set your son free and he will live for a hundred years.' Hearing this
about supreme dharma, let all those who are in this sabha reflect upon the supreme answer to Krishna's question."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Vidura's words, none of the kings uttered a single word. Karna told
Duhshasana, "Take Krishna away to the quarters meant for the servant girls." The ascetic lady[Droupadi.] was trembling,
in shame and complained to the Pandavas, when Duhshasana dragged her in the middle of the sabha.'
