'Bhishma said, "O king! With its well-wishers, a bird lived on the branches of that tree. Its plumage was colourful
and it had lived on the tree for a long time. Its wife had gone out in the morning to roam around and had not returned[In the earlier chapter, the Critical edition excises some shlokas, where
the she-bird had been caught by the fowler.]. On seeing that it was night, the bird lamented. 'There was a great storm and my beloved has not returned. What can be the reason for her not returning yet? I hope my beloved is safe in the forest. Without her, this
home of mine is empty now. Her eyes were tinged with red. Her plumage was colourful. Her voice was sweet.
Since my wife is not here, there is no purpose in my remaining alive. Her dharma was in devotion to her husband.
She was virtuous. She was more important than my life. That ascetic one was devoted to my welfare when she
knew that I was exhausted or hungry. She was devoted to her husband. On earth, a man who has a wife like that is
fortunate. It has been read that a wife is a man's supreme protector and that in this world, a man who does not have
her as a companion along the journey, is helpless. For someone who has been overwhelmed by disease, for someone who has faced a hardship and for someone who is afflicted, there is no medication that is equal to a wife.
There is no relative who is equal to a wife. There is no objective who is equal to a wife. In accomplishing dharma
in this world, there is no aide who is equal to a wife.' Distressed, the bird lamented in this way there.

'"The wife had been seized by the slayer of birds and heard these words. Since her husband was miserable, she
was also distressed by grief and thought, 'Someone whose husband is not satisfied does not deserve to be called a
wife. With the fire as a witness[A reference to the rites of marriage.], a husband becomes a wife's refuge.' The she-pigeon, captured by Lubdhaka,
carefully spoke these words. 'I will tell you what is indeed beneficial for you. Having heard, act accordingly. O
beloved one! In particular, one must always provide succour to someone who seeks refuge. This fowler has resorted to your residence and is lying down. He is afflicted by cold. He is afflicted by hunger. It is necessary to honour
him. If someone who seeks refuge is allowed to perish, the sin is equal to that from killing a brahmana or a cow,
who is the mother of the worlds. Following the dharma of different species, that of pigeons has been ordained for
us[Since these are pigeons, they can only offer limited hospitality. Alternatively, this might mean that pigeons are meant to be eaten.]. A knowledgeable person like you must always practise what is proper. If a householder follows dharma to
the best of his capacity, when he dies, we have heard that he obtains the undecaying worlds. O bird! You have obtained offspring. You have sons. Therefore, follow dharma and artha and give up all love for your body. Engage in
honouring him, so that his mind is cheered.' The ascetic she-bird was imprisoned inside the cage. Extremely miserable, it glanced towards its husband and spoke these words. When it[The male pigeon.] heard its wife's words, which were full of
dharma and reason, its eyes overflowed with tears and it was filled with great joy. It glanced towards the fowler,
who earned a living from birds. The bird carefully honoured him, following the ordained rites. It said, 'Welcome.
What can I do for you? Since this is like your own house, you should not suffer from any misery. Therefore, tell
me quickly what I should do. What do you desire? You have sought refuge with me and I am speaking affectionately towards you. If a guest comes and seeks refuge, one must tend to him carefully. This is particularly true of a
householder who is engaged in the five sacrifices[Sacrifices to gods, sacrifices to ancestors, sacrifices to guests, sacrifices
to dependents and sacrifices to one's own self.]. If a person who is a householder is confused and does not observe these five sacrifices, then, according to dharma, he possesses neither this world, nor the next. Therefore,
without any hesitation, tell me. Speak to me carefully and I will do everything. Do not unnecessarily sorrow in
your mind.'

'"Hearing these words, Lubdhaka spoke to the bird. 'The cold is constraining me. You should free me from the
cold.' Having been thus addressed, the bird carefully covered the ground with dry leaves. The bird then quickly
departed to fetch fire. It went to a place where charcoal was burnt and having obtained some fire, brought it back.
It kindled a fire in those dry leaves. Having created a great fire, it told the one who had sought refuge, 'Be assured
and without fear. Heat your limbs.' Having been thus addressed, Lubdhaka agreed and warmed his limbs. His life
having been restored by the fire, he spoke to the bird. 'The hunger is killing me. I desire that you should give me
some food.' On hearing this, the bird spoke these words. 'I do not possess any riches with which I can destroy your
hunger. We, residents of the forest, survive on what grows here. Like the sages in a forest, we do not possess any
stores.' Having spoken thus, its face turned pale. O best among the Bharata lineage! It began to think about what
should be done next and condemned its own mode of existence[Because guests could not be fed.]. Having thought for an instant, the bird regained
its senses and spoke to the slayer of birds. 'Wait for a while. I will satisfy you.' Having said this, it kindled a fire
with dry leaves. Filled with great delight, the pigeon spoke again. 'From great-souled gods, sages and ancestors, I
have earlier heard about the great dharma that comes from honouring guests. Show me your favours[A guest offers an opportunity to a householder to follow dharma and
thus shows favours.]. I am
telling you this truthfully. My mind has certainly been made up on honouring a guest.' Having taken this pledge,
the bird seemed to be smiling. O lord of the earth! It circumambulated the fire three times and entered. When Lub-
dhaka saw that the bird had entered in the midst of the fire, he began to think in his mind, 'What have I done? Alas.
Shame on my reprehensible and violent deeds. There is no doubt that I have committed great and terrible
adharma.' In this fashion, Lubdhaka repeatedly lamented in many ways. On seeing that the bird had gone, he condemned his own deeds."'
