'Markandeya said, "When Mahasena was united with Shri and became the general of the gods[The text says devasenapati. This can mean either general of the gods, or Devasena's husband. Both are
equally correct.], the six goddesses who were the wives of the saptarshis came to him. They had been abandoned by the rishis, though they were devoted to dharma and were great in their vows. They swiftly went to the lord who was the general of the gods and
said, 'O son! Without any reason and driven by anger, our divine husbands have abandoned us. O son! We have
been dislodged from our pure positions. It is said that someone reported we gave birth to you and they heard this
falsehood. You should save us. O lord! Through your favours, we should attain eternal heaven. We wish that you
should be our son. When you do this, you will be freed from your debt.' Skanda replied, 'O unblemished ones!
You are truly my mothers and I am your son. You will obtain everything that you have asked for.' When this had
been said, he[Skanda.] asked Shakra, 'What should be done?' Asked thus by Skanda, Vasava replied, 'Abhijit is Rohini's
younger sister, but is proud[The twenty-seven nakshatras were Daksha's daughters and were married to Chandra, the moon. Krittika is
the third, Rohini is the fourth, Dhanishtha is the twenty-third. Abhijit is not one of the twenty-seven, but has been
added as a twenty-eighth, between the twenty-first and the twenty-second. The story in the text is clearly about the
order of these nakshatras. Rohini was the first because Chandra loved her the most.]. The goddess wishes to be the eldest and has gone to the forest to perform austerities. O fortunate one! I am bewildered, because a nakshatra has been dislodged from the sky. O Skanda! Consult
with Brahma about that excellent time[The time that the dislodged nakshatra was supposed to measure.]. Brahma determined the time for Dhanishtha and the others. Rohini was
the first and their number used to be complete.' Having been thus addressed by Shakra, the Krittikas went to heaven. This nakshatra is presided over by the god of fire and shines in the form of a cart[One can visualize the major stars of Pleiades arranged in the form of a cart.].

'"Vinata[Vinata is Garuda's mother. However, Svaha assumed the form of a Garudi. So this Vinata means Svaha,
rather than the Vinata who is Garuda's mother.] told Skanda, 'You are my son and you are entitled to offer me funeral oblations. O son! I wish to
live with you always.' Skanda replied, 'I bow before you. Let it be that way. Instruct me with a mother's affection.
O goddess! Worshipped by your daughter-in-law, you will always live here.' Then the entire group of mothers
spoke to Skanda in these words. 'The wise ones have praised us as the mothers of all the worlds. But we wish to be
your mother. Therefore, show us honour.' Skanda replied, 'You will be my mothers and I will be your son. Tell me
what I should do to satisfy your wishes.' The mothers said, 'In earlier times, others had been thought of as mothers
of the world. Let us have that position and let them no longer have that position. O bull among gods! Let us be
worshipped by the world, not them. Because of you, we have been deprived of our offspring[Probably because their husbands had abandoned them.]. Give them back
to us.' Skanda replied, 'You cannot wish for offspring that have already been given away. But if you so wish, I can
give you other offspring.' The mothers said, 'While we are with you, we wish to devour the offspring of those
mothers[It now becomes clear that these other mothers are the natural mothers of children.]. Give them to us. They and their gods are different from you.' Skanda replied, 'I can give you offspring. But what you have asked for will be extremely painful. O fortunate ones! Protect the offspring as long as
they are good and show you homage.' The mothers said, 'O fortunate one! O Skanda! As you desire, we will protect the offspring. O Skanda! O lord! If it pleases you, we wish to live with you always.' Skanda replied, 'In different forms, afflict the offspring of young humans until they have attained sixteen years of age. I will give you undecaying and terrible souls. With these, you will live in supreme happiness and also be worshipped a lot.' At that, an
extremely strong being, golden in complexion, sprung up from Skanda's body to devour the offspring of humans.
Oppressed by hunger, it suddenly fell down on the ground, unconscious.

'"With Skanda's permission, it became a graha[A graha is something that seizes or grasps, that is, it is an evil spirit. It is also possible, in this context, to interpret a graha as a disease.], terrible in form. Supreme brahmanas know it by the name
of Skandapasmara[Literally, Skanda's falling sick, or Skanda's epilepsy.]. The extremely terrible Vinata is known as the graha Shakuni. The rakshasa woman Putana
is known by the learned as the graha Putana. She is terrible in form. She is fearful in form. She causes great pain
and roams around in the night. The pishacha woman who is terrible in form is known as Shitaputana. Her form is
fearful and she steals embryos from women. Aditi is known as Revati and her graha is known as Raivata. This extremely terrible and gigantic graha afflicts children. Diti, the mother of the daityas, is known as Mukhamandika.
This inaccessible demoness happily feeds on the flesh of children. The Kumaras and the Kumaris are said to have
been created from Skanda. O Kouravya! They are extremely large grahas and all of them devour embryos.
They[The Kumaras.] are known as the husbands of the Kumaris. They are terrible in deeds, and without it being known, they
snatch small children. O king! The wise know Surabhi to be the mother of cattle. Shakuni rides on her, and with
her, devours children on earth. O lord of men! The goddess Sarama is the mother of dogs. She always robs the embryos of women. The mother of trees resides in a karanja[The name of a tree used for medicinal purposes.]. Men who wish to have sons worship her in the
karanja. These eighteen grahas, and others, are fond of meat and liquor[The number eighteen is not clearly explained. It could be Skandapasmara, Shakuni, Putana, Shitaputana,
Revati, Mukhamandika, Surabhi, Sarama and Karanji (adding up to nine) and devagraha, pitrigraha, siddhagraha,
rakshasagraha, yakshagraha, pishachagraha, gandharvagraha (adding up to seven) mentioned a little later, with
perhaps Vinata and Kadru added. Alternatively, children are believed to suffer from nine different kinds of diseases
or afflictions. Eighteen might mean these nine diseases and the nine mothers who preside over these diseases.]. They always live for ten nights in
places where delivery takes place. Assuming a subtle form, Kadru enters a woman who is pregnant. She devours
the embryo there and she[The mother.] gives birth to a serpent instead[Kadru is the mother of serpents. Arishta is the mother of gandharvas and Muni is the mother of apsaras, and
Arishta and Muni are Kadru's sisters. But here, Kadru seems to be the mother of gandharvas and apsaras.]. The mother of gandharvas grasps the embryo and
departs. On earth, that woman is seen as one whose foetus has vanished. The mother of apsaras grasps the embryo
and sits and the learned refer to this as a foetus that is seated[Perhaps implying that the foetus does not move and is dead.]. The daughter of the ocean of blood is known as
Skanda's nurse. In a kadamba tree, she is worshipped by the name of Lohitayani[Literally, someone whose path is red.]. Arya dwells among women,
the way Rudra resides in men. Kumara's mother Arya is separately worshipped for the fulfilment of desires.

'"I have thus recounted for you the great grahas of the Kumaras. They are inauspicious up to sixteen years of
age. After that, they turn auspicious. The listed group of mothers and the male grahas are always known by everyone as Skanda grahas, residing in the body. They are pacified through oblations, bathing, incense, collyrium, sacrifices and gifts, especially rites for Skanda. When thus worshipped and offered homage properly, all of them bestow
welfare, long lives and energy on men. O Indra among kings! After worshipping Maheshvara, I will now recount
the grahas that afflict men beyond the sixteenth year. The man who sees gods, whether asleep or awake, swiftly
turns mad and the learned know this as devagraha. The man who sees his ancestors, whether seated or asleep,
swiftly turns mad and this is known as pitrigraha. He who disrespects the siddhas angers them and is cursed by
them, swiftly turning mad, and this is known as siddhagraha. He who inhales fragrances and tastes different
flavours, swiftly turns mad and this is known as rakshasagraha. A man on earth who is touched by celestial gandharvas, swiftly turns mad and this is known as gandharvagraha. Over a period of time, a man who is entered by
yakshas, swiftly turns mad and this is known as yakshagraha. A man who is always ascended by pishachas, swiftly
turns mad and this is known as pishachagraha. A man whose mind is deluded and turbulent because of these evils,
swiftly turns mad, and must be cured in accordance with the sacred texts. Men swiftly turn mad because of perplexity, fear and terrible sights, and must be cured through rites. There are three types of grahas-some are frolicsome, others are gluttons, and others are lustful. They afflict men until the attainment of seventy years of age. After
that, fever is the equivalent of a graha for men. Grahas always avoid those who have not dispersed their senses and
those who are controlled, pure and always attentive, and also those who believe in god and are devoted. This is the
description of grahas that afflict men. Grahas do not touch men who are devoted to the god Maheshvara."'
