'"Suparna said, 'Since one is absolved from sins and obtains supreme welfare, learned ones therefore refer to it as
the northern direction[Uttara means north, while uttarana is the act of delvering.]. O Galava! The road to the north is golden and is said to be between the western and eastern directions. O bull among brahmanas! The north is the supreme of directions. People who are not tranquil, have
not controlled their souls and are not devoted to dharma cannot dwell there. Krishna Narayana and Jishnu, supreme
among men, live there in the hermitage of Badari, as does the eternal Brahma. Here, on the slopes of the Himalayas, Maheshvara always resides. The moon was instated as the king of the brahmanas here. O one who is
learned about the brahman! When Ganga descended from the sky, Mahadeva held her here and gave her to the
world of men. The goddess[Uma.] performed austerities here to obtain Maheshvara. Desire, anger, mountains and Uma
were created here. O Galava! The lord of riches[Kubera.] was instated here on Kailasa as the lord of the rakshasas, the
yakshas and the gandharvas. This is the beautiful Chaitraratha and the hermitage of the Vaikhanasas[Ascetic community.]. O bull
among brahmanas! Mandakini and Mandara are here. There is the forest of Sougandhika, guarded by the Nairittas.
There are meadows and groves of plantains and the Santanaka mountains. The Siddhas are here, always controlled.
O Galava! They can roam around as they wish in excellent vimanas and can enjoy them as they wish. The seven
rishis are here and the goddess Arundhati[Married to Vasishtha.]. This is said to be the place of Svati, because it rises here[Svati (Arcturus) is the fifteenth of the nakshatras.]. When a
sacrifice was performed, the grandfather determined that this would be Dhruva's[The pole star. Dhruva was Vishnu's devotee and was elevated to that position.] place. The stars, and the moon
and the sun, always circle around him. O supreme among brahmanas! The great-souled and truthful sages named
Dhama protect the gate of Gayantika here. Their origins, shapes, or the strength of their austerities, are not known.
O Galava! They have created one thousand orbits that can be enjoyed as one desires. Whenever a man penetrates
beyond this, he vanishes. O bull among brahmanas! No one has ever gone beyond this, except the god Narayana
and the undecaying Nara Jishnu. This is the region of Ilavila's son[Kubera.], known as Kailasa. The ten apsaras known as
Vidyutprabhas were born here. When Vishnu strode the three worlds, he placed a foot in the spot known as Vishnupada[Vishnu's foot.]. O brahmana! This is the northern direction. O supreme among brahmanas! O brahmana rishi! King
Marutta performed a sacrifice here, at Ushirabija, and there is a golden pond there. Jimuta is a great-souled brahmana rishi and the sacred and clear pond of the Himalayas, full of lotuses, waits upon him in person there. Having
donated all those great riches to brahmanas, the maharshi left for the forest known as Jimutavana. O bull among
the brahmanas! O Galava! The guardians of the directions always gather here in the morning and in the evening,
loudly wishing to know who desires what. O foremost among brahmanas! This is the northern region, foremost in
its qualities[Uttara means both north and superior.]. It is known as the north because it is foremost in all deeds. O son[The word used is tata.]! I have now described the directions to you in detail. I have described all four in due order. Which one do you wish to go to? O foremost
among brahmanas! O brahmana! I am ready to show you all the directions and the entire earth. O brahmana!
Climb up on me.'"'
