'Sanjaya said, "He[Karna's younger brother.] repeatedly stretched the bow that he held in his hand and roared. He quickly placed himself
between those two[Abhimanyu and Karna.] great-souled rathas. As if smiling, he quickly pierced the unassailable Abhimanyu, his umbrella, his standard, his charioteer and his horses with ten arrows. Krishna's son[Krishna is one of Arjuna's names.] had performed superhuman
deeds, like his father and his grandfather. On seeing him afflicted by the arrows, those on your side were delighted.
Abhimanyu smiled at this. He stretched his bow and used a single arrow to sever his head[Of Karna's younger brother.], which fell down from
the chariot onto the ground. It was like a karnikara tree uprooted from a mountain by the wind. O king! On seeing
that his brother had been slain, Karna was overcome by grief. Having forced Karna to retreat, Subhadra's son used
arrows tufted with heron feathers to quickly rout the other great archers. He shattered that net of elephants, horses,
chariots and infantry. The immensely illustrious Abhimanyu angrily routed them with his arrows. Karna was afflicted by Abhimanyu's many arrows. He fled on swift horses and the array was shattered. O king! Abhimanyu's
arrows covered the sky, like locusts or like a shower, and nothing could be seen. The warriors on your side were
slaughtered by those sharp arrows. O king! But for the king of Sindhu[Jayadratha.], no one remained. Subhadra's son, bull
among men, blew on his conch shell. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He swiftly descended on the army of the
Bharatas. He quickly consumed the enemy, like a kindled fire on dry wood. Arjuna's son circled around, in the
midst of the soldiers of the Bharatas. He used his sharp arrows to mangle the chariots, elephants, horses and men.
The earth became impassable, because it was strewn with large numbers of headless torsos. Supreme arrows were
released from the bow of Subhadra's son. Wishing to save their lives, they[The Kourava soldiers.] fled, killing those on their own side in
the process. There were broad and sharp vipatha arrows, terrible, and the performer of cruel deeds. They killed
charioteers, elephants and horses and swiftly covered the ground. Severed arms were seen in that battle. They held
weapons and were clad in finger guards. They held swords and were adorned with armlets. They were decorated in
golden ornaments. They held bows and arrows. There were bodies and heads with earrings and garlands. There
were thousands of these on the ground. It was impenetrable because of the decorations, seats, long poles, shattered
axles and yokes, fragmented wheels and many chariots. There were javelins, swords and other weapons. Giant
standards fell down. O lord of the earth! Kshatriyas, horses and elephants were slain. The earth became impassable
and soon assumed an extremely terrible form. The princes were slain and lamented loudly. A great sound arose and
it increased the fear of cowards. O best of the Bharata lineage! That sound filled all the directions. Subhadra's son
attacked the soldiers and killed the horses, rathas and elephants. He roamed in all the directions and nothing could
be seen because of the dust that arose. Since they were enveloped in dust, we could not see the soldiers then. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He killed the elephants, horses and men. We saw him the next instant, like the
midday sun. O great king! Abhimanyu scorched the masses of the enemy. The son of Vasava's son was like Vasava
in the battle. O great king! Abhimanyu roamed around in the midst of the soldiers."'
