'"Galava said, 'There is an immensely valorous lord of men named Divodasa. That lord is the lord of Kashi. He is
a descendant of Bhimasena[Not to be confused with the Pandava Bhimasena.]. O fortunate one! Let us go there quickly. Do not sorrow. That lord of men is devoted to dharma. He is self-controlled and is devoted to the truth.'"

'Narada said, "When the sage went to the king, he was greeted with honours. Galava then requested him to have
offspring."

'"Divodasa replied, 'O brahmana! I have heard about all this already. There is no need to say more. O supreme
among brahmanas! As soon as I heard about this, I wished that this should happen. You have passed over many
other kings and have come to me and this shows me great honour. There is no doubt that this will come to pass. O
Galava! But so far as horses are concerned, I have the same number. Therefore, I will also give birth to one king
through her.'"

'Narada said, "The foremost among brahmanas agreed to this. He gave the maiden to the lord of the earth and
the king accepted her in accordance with the prescribed rites. The rajarshi pleasured with her like Ravi[The sun god. The name of the female consort is given second.] with
Prabhavati, Vahni[Agni.] with Svaha, Vasava with Shachi, Chandra with Rohini, Yama with Dhumorna, Varuna with
Gouri, Dhaneshvara[Kubera.] with Riddhi, Narayana with Lakshmi, the ocean with Jahnavi[Ganga.], Rudra with Rudrani, the
grandfather[Brahma.] with the altar, Vasishtha's son with Adrishyanti, Vasishtha with Akshamala, Chyavana with
Sukanya, Pulastya with Sandhya, Agastya with Vaidharbhi, Satyavan with Savitri, Bhrigu with Puloma, Kashyapa
with Aditi, Richika's son[Jamadagni.] with Renuka, Koushika with Haimavati, Brihaspati with Tara, Shukra with Shataparva, Bhumipati with Bhumi, Pururava with Urvashi, Richika with Satyavati and Manu with Sarasvati. After King
Divodasa pleasured with her, Madhavi gave birth to a single son named Pratardana. At the right time, the illustrious Galava came to Divodasa and told him, 'O lord of the earth! Return the maiden to me. But keep the horses
here, while I go elsewhere for a bride price.' At the right time, Divodasa, lord of the earth who was established in
truth and had dharma in his soul, returned the maiden to Galava."'
