'Vidura said, "O Indra among kings! O son of Vichitravirya! O fortunate one! O Indra among men! Svayambhuva
Manu[Each manvantara (era) is presided over by a sovereign known as Manu. It is because humans are descended
from Manu that they are known as manava. There are fourteen manvantaras and fourteen Manus to preside over
them. The present manvantara is the seventh and the Manu who presides over this is known as Vaivasvata, because
he was born from the sun (Vivasvat). Svayambhuva Manu was the first Manu and he is thus named because he created himself.] named seventeen kinds of men who strike the air with their fists and seek to bend Indra's unbendable bow
and also seek to bend the unbendable rays of the sun-he who instructs one who should not be taught; he who is
angered; he who worships his enemies; he who fails to protect women; he who asks for what should not be asked;
he who boasts; he who is well born, but does not perform proper acts; he who is weak, but always fights with
someone stronger; he who speaks to someone who does not have faith in him; he who desires what should not be
desired; he who is a father-in-law, but jokes with his daughter-in-law; he who dwells with his daughter-in-law, but
expects to be respected; he who sows his seed in another man's field[Meaning, another man's wife.]; he who slanders women excessively; he
who having received something from someone, does not remember it; he who having given, boasts about it; and he
who seeks to prove that an evil person is honest. These men pursue the wind with nooses in their hands[Signifying something that is impossible.]. A man
must be treated in accordance with what he is, and how he acts. That is dharma. One who uses deceit, must be
treated with deceit[The word used is maya.]. One who is virtuous, must be treated with virtue."

'Dhritarashtra said, "It has been said in all the Vedas that a man has a life expectancy of one hundred years.
What is the reason for not attaining that entire age?"

'Vidura replied, "O lord of men! Too much talk, too much pride, lack of renunciation, anger, avarice and enmity
with friends-these are six sharp swords that slice off the life expectancies of embodied beings. O fortunate one! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is these that kill a man, not death. He who goes to the wife of someone who
trusts him, he who violates his preceptor's bed, a brahmana who marries a shudra woman or drinks liquor and one
who kills someone who seeks refuge-all these are the equals of a killer of brahmanas. The learned texts say that
penances must be performed for associating with these. A generous householder whose words are not mixed with
falsehood, one who eats last[After the ancestors, the gods and the guests have eaten.], one who does not cause any violence, one who does not do any harm, one who
avoids discord, one who is grateful, one who is truthful, one who is mild-such a learned person goes to heaven. O
king! It is easy to find men who are always pleasant in speech. But it is difficult to find a speaker or a listener for
unpleasant, but appropriate words. A king has a friend in a person who resorts to dharma and regardless of what is
pleasant or unpleasant to his lord, provides unpleasant but appropriate counsel. A man must be abandoned for the
sake of the lineage. A lineage must be abandoned for the sake of the village. A village must be abandoned for the
sake of the country. The earth must be abandoned for the sake of the soul. One must preserve riches for the sake of
a calamity. One must protect one's wife with one's riches. One must always protect oneself with one's wife and
riches.

'"O king! O descendant of Pratipa[Dhritarashtra was Vichitravirya's son and Pratipa was an earlier ancestor.]! At the time of the dicing, I had told you that it was not right. O son of Vichitravirya! But that brought you displeasure, like medicine and diet to a man who is diseased. You have vanquished the Pandavas, who are like peacocks with many-coloured feathers, with the sons of Dhritarashtra, who are
like crows. You have given up the lions and have resorted to the assembled jackals. O Indra among men! When the
time comes, you will sorrow over this. The servants are devoted to a lord who is not angry all the time and faithfully seek to ensure his welfare. They do not forsake him in times of difficulty. One should not seek to increase the
prosperity of strangers by curtailing the wages that are paid to servants. Deprived of comforts and denied what has
been due to them, even affectionate advisers turn against their lord. Having first accounted for everything that must
be done and having determined wages according to the tasks, one must then seek to obtain appropriate allies. Allies accomplish what is difficult to achieve. He who knows all the intentions of his lord, performs his tasks tirelessly. He speaks for his welfare and is affectionate and noble[Arya.]. He knows his own strengths and should be regarded
as one's own self[The servant should be regarded as the master's own self.]. If a servant is instructed but pays no attention to the words, or if he answers back when he is
instructed, if he argues because of insolence over his wisdom, he must instantly be dismissed.

'"Lacking in pride, manly, swift to act, compassionate, polished, incapable of corruption, free from disease and
generous in speech-it is said that these eight qualities must characterize a messenger. A sensible man must never
go to the house of a stranger at the wrong time, out of a sense of confidence. He must not conceal himself at a
crossroads in the night. He must not desire a woman whom the kings want. One should not seek counsel with one
who is in disguise, or one who associates with lowly company. There is no need to say that such a person is untrustworthy, but one should dismiss him on some pretext. A compassionate king must avoid financial transactions
with a harlot, the servant of a king, a son, a brother, a widow with infant children, a mercenary and one who has
devoted servants[The text isn't very clear and some liberties have been taken. The suggestion seems to be that one shouldn't have
lending and borrowing transactions with these.]. Eight qualities adorn a man who bathes-strength, beauty, pureness in pronunciation of vowels, delicacy of touch, fragrance, cleanliness, prosperity and association with beautiful women. Six qualities adorn
those who eat in moderation-immunity from disease, long life, happiness, strength, possession of children who
are healthy and freedom from accusations about being a glutton. One who performs improper acts, one who eats
excessively, one who is hated by men, one who is deceitful, one who is cruel, one who has no sense of time or
space, one who does not know how to dress-such people should not be given a lodging in the house. Even if one
is in need, one must not solicit help from a miser, one who speaks with malice, one who is not learned, one who
has fallen into evil ways, one who respects the unworthy, one who is cruel, one who makes enemies out of others
and one who is ungrateful. There are six worst kinds of men one must not serve-those engaged in vile deeds,
those who speak a lot, those who always utter lies, those lacking in devotion, those who are devoid of affection and
those who are vain. Success depends on one's aides and aides depend on one's success. They depend on each other
and each cannot succeed without the other. After one has obtained sons and not burdened them with one's debts,
one must arrange a livelihood for them. After marrying off one's daughters properly, one must resort to the forest
and live the life of a hermit. One must act for the welfare of all beings and for that which brings happiness to one's
own self. This must be done for the sake of god and this is the root behind the success of dharma and artha. Intelligence, power, energy, spirit, resilience and resolution-if one possesses these, why should one be afraid that one
might not have a livelihood?

'"Behold the evils from having engaged in a quarrel with the Pandavas. Even the gods, together with Shakra,
tremble at them. This enmity with your sons leads to a life full of constant anxiety and the destruction of fame,
leading to the delight of your enemies. You are an equal of Indra. This anger of Bhishma's, of Drona's, and of
King Yudhishthira's, when ignited, will destroy the world, like a white planet that obliquely descends from the sky.
Your hundred sons, together with Karna, and the five Pandavas can rule the entire earth, up to the frontiers of the
ocean. O king! The sons of Dhritarashtra are the forest and it is my view that Pandu's sons are the tigers. Do not
cut down the forest with its tigers. Do not drive the tigers away from the forest. The forest is protected by the
tigers. The tigers are protected by the forest. Those who are evil in intelligence do not wish to know about the good
qualities of others, as much as they wish to know about the qualities they don't possess. If one wishes artha to be
accomplished completely, one must adhere to dharma right from the beginning. Artha is not separated from dharma, just as amrita is not separated from the world of heaven. All this, whether it is natural or not natural, is known
to one who withdraws from evil and devotes himself to welfare. He who serves dharma, artha and kama at the
right time, obtains a combination of dharma, artha and kama here, and in the hereafter. O king! One who controls
the rising force of anger and delight obtains prosperity and is not deluded when there is a calamity.

'"Listen to me. Men always possess five kinds of strength and the strength of arms is said to be the most inferior
of strengths. O fortunate one! The obtaining of good advisers is said to be the second strength. Those who wish to
be victorious have said that the obtaining of riches is the third strength. O king! One's natural strength, obtained
from a father and a grandfather, is the strength of noble birth and is said to be the fourth strength. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! But all these strengths are collected in the strength that is said to be the most superior, the
strength that derives from wisdom. If a man does great injury to another man and thereby excites his enmity, he
cannot presume to be secure, only because he is a long distance away. In deciding on what should be done, no wise
man can be certain about women, kings, snakes, studying, those who serve the enemy, objects of desire and the
span of life. For one who has been pierced by the arrow of wisdom, there are no physicians or medicines, no
mantras chanted with oblations, no benedictions, no incantations and no successful antidotes to poison[A wise person has no use for these.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A man should not ignore a snake, a fire, a lion, or a son born from a noble lineage.
All of them are extremely energetic. The energy of fire is great in this world. It is hidden in wood, but does not
consume the wood, unless it is ignited by others. But when the wood is drilled and kindled through friction, it[The fire.]
uses its energy to swiftly burn up the wood, the forest and everything else. In the same way, those born in noble
lineages have the energy of the fire. They are forgiving and seem to have no form, like fire inside wood. You and
your sons follow the way of creepers. It is my view that Pandu's sons are the shala trees. Creepers cannot grow
without resorting to a large tree. O king! O son of Ambika! You and your sons are the forest. O father[The word used is tata.]! Know that
the Pandavas are the lions in the forest. Devoid of the lions, the forest will be destroyed. Without the forest, the lions will be destroyed."'
