Yudhishthira said, "O Kourava! I wish to hear about the origin and end of all beings. From one yuga to another
yuga, what is the nature of meditation, deeds and time? What is the truth about all the worlds and beings,
their coming and going? How do creation and destruction come about? O supreme among virtuous ones! I
am asking you. If your intelligence is so disposed as to favour me, you should tell me. Earlier, I heard you recount
the supreme words that Bhrigu spoke to the brahmana rishi Bharadvaja, supreme in his intelligence. Therefore, I
have become supremely devoted to dharma and wish to find refuge in that celestial spot. Therefore, I am asking
you again and you should tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about the illustrious Vyasa being asked by
his son. Vyasa's son, Shuka, studied all the Vedas, Vedangas and Upanishads and having become accomplished
about the knowledge of dharma, wished to find out about virtuous deeds. Vyasa's son thus asked Krishna Dvaipayana, so that his doubt and uncertainty about the purport of dharma might be dispelled. 'Who is the creator of all
the categories of beings? How is the classification of time determined? What are the tasks that brahmanas should
perform? You should tell me.' Having been thus asked by the son, the father told him about everything. He knew
about everything and about all forms of dharma. He knew about the past and the future.

'"'Brahma is without a beginning and without an end[This is Vyasa speaking.]. He is without origin and divine. He is without decay.
He is permanent and without transformation. He cannot be thought of. He cannot be known. Before everything
else, Brahma was there. Fifteen nimeshas[The twinkling of the eye.] make a kashtha. Thirty kashthas are reckoned as a kala. Thirty kalas
and an additional one tenth of a kala make a muhurta. Thirty muhurtas make up one day and one night. This is the
enumeration given by the sages. Thirty days and nights are said to be one month. Twelve months are said to constitute one year. Those who know about numbers say that there are two ayanas in a year, uttara and dakshina[Respectively, the sun's movement north of the equator and south of the equator.]. In
the world of men, the sun separates day from night. Beings make efforts to undertake tasks during the day and
sleep during the night. One such month[For men] is again one day and one night for the ancestors. Krishnapaksha is their
day and they undertake action then, while shuklapaksha is their night and they sleep then[Non-critical versions often reverse the order, with ancestors sleeping during krishnapaksha.]. One year[For numans] is again
one day and one night for the gods. Uttarayana is their day and dakshinayana is their night. I have already recounted day and night in the world of the gods. I will now tell you about the number of years for Brahma. In due
order, I will tell you about the number of years in krita, treta, dvapara and kali yuga. Four thousand years[Of the gods.] is said
to be the duration of krita yuga. There are another four hundred years as morning and four hundred as evening[Sandhya, the intervening period between two yugas. Krita yuga thus consists of four thousand and eight hundred
divine years.].
For the other three, the main is reduced by one fourth, or thousand, and the sandhya by hundred[Treta yuga has 3,000 main years and 300 years in each sandhya, with total 3,600 years. Dvapara yuga has 2,000
main years and 200 years in each sandhya, with a total of 2,400 years. Kali yuga has 1,000 main years and 
hundred years in each sandhya, with a total of 1,200 years.]. These measurements continuously hold up the eternal worlds. O son[The word used is tata.]! Those who know about Brahma also know the eternal
brahman. In krita yuga, all the four parts of dharma and truth exist. This is supreme and nothing is followed that is
against dharma. In each of the others, dharma is seen to progressively reduce by one-fourth. Theft, falsehood, deceit and adharma flourish. In krita, there is no disease. There is success in all pursuits and the life span is four hundred years. In treta, the life span is reduced by a quarter. We have heard that the following of the Vedas, life spans,
benedictions and the fruits of the Vedas also progressively decrease. There are different kinds of dharma for krita
yuga, treta and dvapara. Dharma is also different for kali yuga, when one acts according to one's capacity. Austerities are supreme in krita yuga and knowledge is supreme in treta. Sacrifices are spoken of in dvapara and donations
in kali yuga. Wise and learned ones say that twelve thousand years constitute a yuga[Twelve thousand divine years represent one cycle of krita, treta, dvapara and kali and one such cycle is a
mahayuga.]. A thousand of these[Mahayugas.] is
said to be one of Brahma's days. Brahma's night is also like that. When it is day for the lord, the universe is created. When it is destroyed, he immerses himself in adhyatma[The universe is destroyed when it is Brahma's night. During the night, Brahma meditates.]. At the end of the sleep, he awakes. People who
know about night and day say that Brahma's day is for one thousand yugas and his night is also for one thousand
yugas.

'"'When the night is over, the unmanifest Brahma awakes. Though he is not manifest, he creates the great being
that is his manifest mind. Brahma is the energetic seed and everything in the universe springs from that. From that
single being, both mobile and immobile objects are created. When it is dawn, he awakes and creates the universe
with his knowledge. At first, there is Mahabhuta[The great being, also known as Mahat. This is nothing but intelligence.].This quickly becomes Mana[Mind.], the manifest form of the soul.
Those overwhelming rays create those seven through mental powers[Mahat, Mana and the five elements.]. Mana is far-reaching and flows in many
different ways. There are determination and resolution to create and is done by transforming itself. Akasha[Space.] is
generated and sound is held to be its quality. From Akasha is created the pure and powerful Vayu[Wind.], the bearer of
all scents. Touch is held to be its quality. From Vayu is generated Jyoti[Light.], the dispeller of darkness. Those rays are
created and their qualities are held to be form. From Jyoti is created Apa[Water.], with taste as its attribute. From Apa
results Bhumi[Earth.], with scent as its quality. This is said to be the original creation. One after another, they receive
the qualities of the preceding one. They are said to not only possess their own quality, but also of the one from
which they were created[Space only possesses the quality of sound, wind has the qualities of both sound and touch, light has the qualities
of sound, touch and form, water has the qualities of sound, touch, form and taste and earth has the qualities of
sound, touch, form, taste and scent.]. If one discerns scent in water and takes that to be its quality, the person is ignorant.
Scent is known to belong to earth, though it may also find a refuge in water or wind. These seven different entities
have different forms of energy and exist separately, so that beings may be destroyed. But for the sake of creation,
they come together. Those great-souled ones assemble and unite with each other. When they resort to a body, it is
then said to be Purusha. When they resort to the body, there are sixteen forms[The five elements, the five senses, the five organs of action and the mind.]. With all the deeds[Earlier deeds.], Mahat enters the body. For the sake of austerities, it resorts to all beings. This is Mahabhuta, the original creator, and is
known as Prajapati. He creates beings and is the supreme Purusha. Brahma is without orgin and generates gods,
rishis, ancestors, humans, worlds, rivers, oceans, directions, mountains, trees, men[Humans are mentioned twice.], kinnaras, rakshasas, birds,
animals, wild animals[A difference is being drawn between domestic animals and wild animals.], serpents, unmanifest and manifest objects, both mobile and immobile. Each of those created obtains the legacy of its earlier deeds. Having obtained these, each is created again and again. Violence, nonviolence, mildness, cruelty, dharma, adharma, truth, falsehood-the creator thinks of the qualities that had pleased
the being earlier. Mahabhuta affixes the different senses to the bodies of beings and determines the constituent
parts. Some learned ones speak of enterprise, others of earlier deeds. Some brahmanas think of destiny, others
think of the natural traits of beings. Enterprise, deeds and destiny lead to fruits and this is helped by nature. Some
say that thinking of these three as separate is not correct. Some say this is true. Others say that is true. Others speak
of the uneven consequences of deeds. However, there are insightful ones who know about the being who created
the universe and regard all these equally. Austerities bring the greatest benefit to beings and its foundations are
self-control and tranquility. Through these, one obtains everything, all that one desires and wishes for. Through
austerities, one obtains the being who created the universe. He is in all beings and is the lord who created beings. It
is because of austerities that the rishis can study the Vedas, day and night. Svayambhu created those eternal words,
which are without origin and are passed down. Though they go by the names of the rishis, he created the Vedas[The Vedas were only revealed to the rishis, not composed by them.].
When it was the end of the night, he gave it to them. Nama, Bheda, Tapas, Karma, Yajna, Akhya, Loka-siddhi,
Atma-siddhi and the ten kinds of techniques have been spoken of in the Vedas[This shloka is an extremely difficult one to translate and there are complicated issues of interpretation. For example, Nama is understood as referring to the Rig Veda and means the study of all the Vedas. Bheda is division
and is here interpreted as half, that is, the wife, dharma being performed with the wife. Tapas is austerities. Karma stands for rituals and Yajna is sacrifices. Akhya means fame and is the undertaking of public works that
bring one fame. Loka-siddhi is success in this world, while Atma-siddhi is success in the next world. This leaves
the ten techniques. One possible interpretation is patience, forgiveness, self-control, honesty, purity, control of
the senses, intelligence, learning, truthfulness and lack of anger-required for studying the Vedas.]. He[Brahma.] is mysterious and has been
spoken about in the words of the Vedas. Those who have insight into the Vedas know this. He has also been spoken
about at the end[End of the Vedas, Vedanta.] and can be realized by practising the rites. A person who is devoid of yoga has a sense of separateness and duality and is born because of his deeds. However, a person who knows about Atma-siddhi can generally drive that sense forcefully away. There are two Brahmas who should be known, Shabda-Brahma and Para-
Brahma[Shabda means sound and Shabda-Brahma stands for the Vedas. Para-Brahma is beyond the Vedas and is
supreme.]. Having understood Shabda-Brahma, one can go to Para-Brahma.

'"'Slaughter represents sacrifice for kshatriyas. Offerings[Interpreted as agriculture.] represent sacrifice for vaishyas. Servitude represents
sacrifice for shudras. Austerities represent sacrifice for brahmanas. There was no need for sacrifices in krita yuga,
but they were recommended in treta yuga. There was an uprooting of sacrifices in dvapara yuga and this is also
true of kali yuga. Mortals have come to regard Rig, Sama and Yajur as standing for different kinds of dharma.
They desire their own prosperity and look upon austerities and the object of austerities as distinct. In treta, they
were regarded as the same and there were extremely powerful ones, who controlled all mobile and immobile objects. In treta, sacrifices and the varnas co-existed together. However, because lifespans were reduced, these went
into a decline in dvapara yuga. Even if one looks, in kali yuga, all the Vedas cannot be seen. With sacrifices, which
are the bridges of dharma, they have been destroyed. The dharma of krita yuga can only be seen to be vested in
some brahmanas who have cleansed their souls and are learned and are also devoted to austerities. Depending on
the dharma of one yuga and another yuga, people are associated with rites of adharma. Though they know what the
Vedas have described as being appropriate for a certain yuga, they sell their own dharma. When it rains repeatedly
during the monsoon, a large number of beings and immobile objects are generated. From one yuga to another,
dharma[Understood as rituals.] is created in that fashion. As the seasons progress, many different kinds of forms are seen. In that fashion, different signs can be seen in Brahma, Hara and the third[Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu (the third) have different manifestations.]. This has been ordained by time and it has neither
a beginning, nor an end. It has been spoken about earlier and it creates and devours subjects. It is the controller
who uses its powers to establish and restrain them. Because of their nature, they are repeatedly seen to be addicted
to opposite sentiments. O son! I have told you everything that you have asked about-creation, time, rituals, the
Vedas, doers, tasks, action and fruits. I will now tell you about how he[Brahma.] withdraws himself, when it is night and
day is over. The subtle lord of the universe then immerses himself in adhyatma. In the firmament, the sun burns
everything, with its seven crests of flames. Everything is pervaded by those rays and the entire universe starts to
blaze.'"'
