Vaishampayana said, 'The king became silent. Arjuna was tormented and overcome by sorrow and grief because
of the stakes of the king's words. He spoke again. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! People speak about the
ancient account of the history of a conversation between the king of Videha and his wife[Janaka was the king of Videha, Mithila was Videha's capital.]. The lord of men made
up his mind to abandon his kingdom and resort to a life of begging. The queen of the king of Videha was full of
sorrow and addressed him. Janaka gave up riches, offspring, friends, the many jewels and the path of fire[The path of performing sacrifices to the fire.] and
became one who shaved off his head. His beloved wife saw him resort to this life of begging, possessing nothing.
He only had a fistful of grain. He was indifferent and without selfishness. He was without any fear. In an isolated
spot, the angry and spirited wife approached her husband and spoke words that were full of reason. 'Why have you
abandoned your kingdom? It was full of riches and grain. You have adopted a life of mendicancy and are wandering around with a fistful of grain in your hand. O king! Your resolution is of one kind, but your acts are of a different kind. O king! You have abandoned this great kingdom and are satisfied with only a little. O king! In this way,
you will now be unable to support gods, guests, devarshis and ancestors. Therefore, your efforts are futile. O king!
You have been abandoned by all the gods, guests and ancestors and are wandering around as a mendicant, without
any action. You earlier supported thousands of aged brahmanas who knew about the three forms of knowledge[The first three Vedas.].
You supported the world and now wish to be supported by others. Having abandoned the blazing prosperity, you
are glancing around, like a dog. Your mother is without a son now and the daughter of Kosala is without a husband[Janaka was married to the princess of Kosala.]. For the sake of dharma and kama, eighty kshatriya women served you[Presumably Janaka's other wives.]. Those pitiable ones hoped for
the fruits of their actions. Having rendered them unsuccessful, what worlds will you go to? O king! Those bodies
depended on you and their salvation is in doubt. Since you are the performer of wicked deeds, you have no superior world, in this world or in the next. Having abandoned the one who is your wife under dharma, you wish to live.
Why have you abandoned garlands, fragrances, ornaments and many kinds of garments, living like a mendicant,
without any action? You were like a pool[Drinking hole, alternatively, refuge.] for all beings. You were their great cleanser. Having been a tall tree,
you now serve others. When an elephant dies, many carnivorous beasts feed on it and so do many worms. But
what purpose do you serve? How would you feel if someone broke this water pot, stole this trivishtabdha[The three staffs tied together, the mark of a mendicant.]and
robbed you of your garment? You have abandoned everything and have accepted this fistful of grain. Even if this is
equal to all gifts, what will you give me[How will you support your wife?]? If this fistful of grain is all your riches, your pledge will be falsified[The pledge to support the wife.].
Who am I to you? Who are you to me? What favours will you show me now? O king! Rule the kingdom and show
me the favours of a place, bed, vehicle, garments and ornaments. There are those who have no hope of prosperity.
They were without riches. They have no friends. They can renounce. But you have friends, servants and other riches. How can you renounce? There are those who receive a lot and there are those who always give. You know the
difference between these two. Who is said to be superior? If one donates to a person who is always asking, even if
that person is virtuous and without pride, those gifts are like oblations poured into a forest conflagration[A forest conflagration is not a sacred fire.]. O
king! A fire is not pacified until it has consumed everything. In that way, a brahmana who always asks is never satisfied. The Vedas and food are the natural sustenance of virtuous ones in this world. If one who is supposed to give
does not give, where will those who desire salvation go[As a king, Janaka is supposed to give for charity.]? In this world, householders result from food and those
who beg result from them[From the householders.]. Life results from food. One who gives food, gives life. They[The mendicants.] emerge from the
state of being a householder, but have to resort to householders. Those self-controlled ones criticize the base of
their powers[Despite depending on householders, mendicants criticize them.]. A person cannot be said to be one who has renounced only because he is a mendicant, has shaved
his head, or begs. Know that an upright person who happily gives up his wealth is one who renounces[One can renounce while being a householder and donating.]. He is unattached, even if he roams around, as if attached. He is alone and has shed all bonds. O lord of the earth! He treats
friend and foe equally and is truly free. There are those who roam around in search of alms. They have shaved off
their heads and wear ochre robes. But they are tied down by many kinds of bonds and are always thinking about
unsatisfied desire. They cast aside the three types of learning[The first three Vedas.], their names, their livelihoods and their sons. They
accept the trivishtabdha and garments, but do not have understanding. Know that the ochre robe is not without desire for gain. Those with shaved heads wave the banner of dharma, but it is for the purpose of sustenance. That is
my view. O great king! Conquer the world by conquering your senses and support those with ochre robes, those
clad in skins, those clad in tatters, those who are naked, those who have shaved heads and those who sport matted
hair. Who is superior to the one who maintains the sacred fire, performs sacrifices and gives away animals and other donations? From one day to another, incessantly give, as earlier. There is no dharma superior to that.' King
Janaka knew the truth and the world sang about him. He was overcome by confusion. But you should not be confused. This is the dharma that is always followed by benevolent men. Without desire and anger, one should resort
to the quality of non-violence. We should protect the subjects and base ourselves on donating. By being truthful in
speech and honouring the brahmanas, we will obtain the worlds that we desire."'
