'Sanjaya said, "Together, those brave ones[Ashvatthama, Kripa and Kritavarma.] then headed in a southern direction. At a time when the sun was about
to set, they reached the camp[The camp of the Kouravas.]. They unyoked their mounts and were terrified. They went to a deserted region and
entered it. They were not very far away from where the soldiers were encamped. They were mangled, all over their
bodies, with sharp weapons. They let out long and warm sighs and thought of the Pandavas. They heard the fierce
roars emitted by the Pandavas, who were desirous of victory. Fearing that they would be pursued, they again fled
in an eastern direction. However, after travelling for some time, they were thirsty and their mounts were exhausted.
Those great archers could not tolerate what had happened and were overcome by anger and vindictiveness. They
were tormented that the king[Duryodhana.] had been killed and rested for some time."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! The task that Bhima performed is deserving of honour. He brought down my
son, who possessed the strength of ten thousand elephants. He was young and could withstand the vajra. All beings were incapable of slaying him. O son of Gavalgana[Sanjaya was the son of Gavalgana.]! Men cannot overcome destiny. In the battle, the Parthas
clashed against my son and brought him down. O Sanjaya! It is certain that my heart is made out of stone. Despite
having heard about the death of one hundred of my sons, it has not shattered into one thousand fragments. When
their sons have been slain, what will become of this aged couple[Dhritarashtra and Gandhari.]? I am not interested in dwelling in the dominion
of the Pandaveyas. O Sanjaya! How can I? I have myself been a king. I have been the father of a king. How can I
be a servant who follows Pandaveya's commands? O Sanjaya! I have commanded the entire earth and have placed
my feet on its head. How can I be reduced to this difficult state of being a servant? O Sanjaya! How can I bear to
hear Bhima's words? He has single-handedly killed one hundred of my sons. The words that the great-souled
Vidura spoke have come to be true. O Sanjaya! My son did not act in accordance with those words. O son[The word used is tata. This means son, but is affectionately used towards anyone who is younger or junior.]! My
son, Duryodhana, has been slain through adharma[In the duel with the clubs, Bhima struck Duryodhana below the waist and on the thighs, something not sanctioned by the code of fair fighting. This has been described in Section 77 (Volume 7).]. O Sanjaya! What did Kritavarma, Kripa and Drona's son do?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! After those on your side had travelled a short distance, they saw a fierce forest. It was
full of many trees and creepers. They rested there for some time and those supreme horses obtained water. At the
time when the sun was setting, they entered that great forest. It was full of large numbers of many kinds of animals
and many birds. There were diverse trees and creepers and it was full of many kinds of predatory beasts. There
were many beautiful ponds, full of water. These were covered with hundreds of lotuses and blue lotuses. Having
entered that terrible forest, they glanced around in different directions. They saw a banyan tree[Nyagrodha, the banyan tree, the Indian fig tree.] there, with many
thousands of branches. O king! Approaching that banyan tree, those maharathas, best among men, saw that it was
the best among trees. They descended from their chariots there and unyoked the horses. O lord! As is decreed, they
washed themselves and performed the evening rites. At that time, the sun had reached Mount Asta[Mountain behind which the sun sets.], the best of
mountains. Night, the creator of the entire universe[Because there was darkness before the universe was created.], manifested itself. In every direction, the sky was beautiful to
behold. It was ornamented with planets, nakshatras and stars[Nakshatras are specific, while stars are general. There are twenty-seven specific nakshatras and some of these
are collections of stars, rather than individual stars. Therefore, stars are mentioned in addition to nakshatras.]. Beings which are powerful and roam during the
night began to howl. Beings that roam during the day were overcome by sleep. Because of the shrieks of beings
that roam in the night, it became extremely fearful. Predatory beasts were delighted and the night became terrible.
Kritavarma, Kripa and Drona's son sat down together. It was the beginning of that terrible night and they were
overcome by grief and sorrow. They sat down under the banyan tree and sorrowed about the destruction that had
encompassed the Kurus and the Pandaveyas. Their limbs were overtaken by sleep and they lay down on the surface of the ground. They were greatly exhausted and wounded by many arrows. Maharatha Kripa and Bhoja[Kritavarma.] succumbed to sleep. They deserved happiness and did not deserve this misery. However, they slept on the surface of
the ground. O great king! They slept, overcome by exhaustion and sorrow.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But Drona's son was flooded with wrath and intolerance. He could not
sleep and sighed like a snake. He could not obtain any sleep and was tormented by anger. The mighty-armed one
glanced at the forest, which was terrible to behold. He glanced towards the forest, inhabited by many beings. The
mighty-armed one saw the banyan tree, inhabited by tens of thousands of crows[The word used is vayasa. This means crow, but can be applied to a bird in general. However, subsequently, the
word kaka is used. This specifically means a crow.]. Thousands of crows spent the
night there. O Kouravya! Resorting to separate perches, they slept happily. In every direction, those crows were at
ease and slept. He[Ashvatthama.] saw that an owl, terrible in appearance, suddenly arrived. Its shriek was horrible and it was gigantic in form. Its eyes were tawny and its plumage was reddish brown. Its nose and talons were extremely long. It
possessed the speed of Suparna[Garuda's name.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Making only the slightest bit of noise, that
bird approached the branches of the banyan tree. The bird descended on the branch of the banyan tree and having
descended, killed an extremely large number of crows. It tore away the wings of some and severed the heads of
others. With the talons on its feet, it broke the legs of others. It was powerful and in a short while, destroyed the
ones it could see. O lord of the earth! Every side of that banyan tree was strewn with limbs and bodies. Having
slain the crows, the owl was delighted. It was the destroyer of its enemies and had acted against its enemies as it
willed.

'"On witnessing the deceitful act perpetrated by the owl in the night, Drona's son began to think and arrived at a
conclusion. 'For the battle, this bird has given me an instruction. I wish to destroy the enemy and it is my view that
the time has come. The victorious Pandavas are incapable of being slain by me. They are powerful and full of enterprise. They are strikers who accomplish their objectives. But, in the king's[Duryodhana, described in Section 77 (Volume 7).] presence, I pledged to kill them. I
will destroy myself, like an insect engaged in entering a fire. If I fight through fair means, there is no doubt that I
will lose my life. However, there will be success through deceit and great destruction of the enemy. People who are
skilled about sacred texts also abundantly praise certain methods over those that are uncertain. There will be words
of censure and reprimand from the worlds. But a man who has embarked on the dharma of kshatriyas must bear
them. The Pandavas, firm in their enmity, have committed acts of deceit at every step, even though they have been
censured and reprimanded by everyone. On this, those who have thought about dharma have sung a song earlier
and it has been heard. They knew about what was right and proper and recounted these shlokas. "The forces of the
enemy must be struck, whether they are exhausted, shattered, eating, retreating or entering[Their camps.]. Whether they are
sleeping in the middle of the night, whether their paths of progress have been destroyed, whether their warriors
have been slain and whether the forces are hesitant or not, one must act in the same way."' Thinking in this way,
Drona's powerful son resolved to slay the Pandu and Panchala warriors while they slept.

'"Having arrived at this cruel decision and thinking about it repeatedly, he awoke Bhoja and his maternal
uncle[Kripa. Kripa's sister, Kripi, was Drona's wife and Ashvatthama's mother.], who were asleep and told them. They were overcome with shame and did not reply. Having thought for
some time, in a voice that was distracted and choking with tears, he[Ashvatthama.] said, 'King Duryodhana was immensely
strong and the only brave one. He has been killed. It is for his sake that we were engaged in this enmity with the
Pandavas. He was the lord of eleven armies[Akshouhinis.]. He fought single-handedly with many wicked ones and was brought
down by Bhimasena, who acted with the valour of a shudra. Vrikodara also performed an inferior and extremely
cruel deed. He kicked the head of one who had been consecrated with his feet. The Panchalas are roaring, singing
and laughing at this. In their joy, they are blowing on hundreds of conch shells and beating on their drums. That
tumultuous sound of musical instruments is mixing with the blare of conch shells. Those fierce sounds are borne
by the wind and are filling the directions. The horses are neighing and the elephants are trumpeting. The brave
ones are roaring like lions and that great sound can be heard. From the eastern direction[Ashvatthama, Kripa and Kritavarma had also eventually headed towards the east.], those fierce sounds of
rejoicing can be heard. The clatter of chariot wheels can be heard and it makes the body hair stand up. The Pandavas created great carnage among the sons of Dhritarashtra and the three of us are the only ones who have survived. Some of them possessed the life force of one hundred elephants. Some of them were skilled in the use of all
kinds of weapons. But they have been killed by the Pandaveyas. I think that this is destiny. There is no doubt that
deeds lead to such an end. Even if one performs extremely difficult deeds, this is the outcome of that. If your wisdom has not been clouded by your confusion, given this great calamity, decide and tell us about the best course of
action.'"'
