Sanjaya said, "On seeing that he had fallen down, like a giant shala tree uprooted by the wind, all the Pandavas
present there were delighted. He was like a crazy elephant that had been brought down by a lion. On seeing this,
the body hair of the Somakas stood up and they were joyful. Having struck and brought down Duryodhana, the
powerful Bhimasena approached the Indra among the Kouravas and said, 'O wicked one! In earlier times, when
Droupadi was in a single garment, you addressed us as cattle[At the time of the gambling match, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. O evil-minded one! When we were in the assembly hall, you laughed at us. Suffer the consequences of that disrespect now.' Having said this, he kicked his head
with his left foot. He struck the head of that lion among kings with his foot. Bhima was the destroyer of enemy
forces and his eyes were red with rage. O lord of men! He again spoke these words. Listen to them. 'In earlier
times, there were those who danced around and repeatedly called us cattle. We will dance back at them now and
repeatedly address them as cattle. There is no guile, no fire[A reference to the attempt to burn the Pandavas down in the house of
lac.] and no deception in gambling with the dice in us. We
resort to the strength of our own arms and counter our enemies.' Having attained the other shore of the enmity,
Vrikodara laughed and softly spoke these words to Yudhishthira, Keshava, the Srinjayas, Dhananjaya and Madri's
two sons. 'Droupadi was in her season and they disrespected her. They deprived her of her garment there. Behold.
Through Yajnaseni's[Yajnaseni is Droupadi's name.] austerities, in the battle, the sons of Dhritarashtra have been slain by the Pandavas. In earlier times, King Dhritarashtra's wicked sons called us sterile sesamum seeds. They have been slain by us, with their
followers and their relatives. We are indifferent as to whether we go to heaven or to hell.' He again raised the club
that was on his shoulder. Glancing towards the deceitful King Duryodhana, who had fallen down on the ground, he
kicked his head with his left foot and spoke these words. The foremost among the Somakas had dharma in their
souls. O king! On seeing that Bhimasena, inferior in his soul, was kicking the Kuru king on the head with his foot,
they did not approve.

' "Having brought down your son, Vrikodara was bragging. As he danced around in different ways, Dharmaraja
spoke to him. 'O Bhima! Do not crush his head with your foot. Do not greatly transgress dharma. He is a king and
your relative. He has been brought down. O unblemished one! This conduct is not proper. He has been destroyed.
His advisers have been slain. His brothers have been slain. His subjects have been slain. His funeral cakes have
been destroyed[The sons who would have offered Duryodhana funeral cakes have been
killed.]. He is our brother. This conduct of yours is inappropriate. In earlier times, people used to say
that Bhimasena followed dharma. How can Bhimasena then disrespect the king in this way?' Having spoken these
words, the king who was Kunti's son approached and saw Duryodhana. With his eyes full of tears, he spoke these
words. 'It is certain that destiny, ordained by the great-souled Creator, is powerful. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Otherwise, why should you harbour violence towards us and we towards you? It is because of your own misdeeds that you have faced this great calamity. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have reaped it because of
your avarice, insolence and folly. You have slain your friends, your brothers and your fathers. The sons, grandsons
and preceptors have also been slain. It is because of your crimes that your maharatha brothers and other relatives
have been killed. I think that destiny is irresistible. Dhritarashtra's daughters-in-law and grand-daughters-in-law
are miserable. Oppressed by grief, those widows will certainly censure us.' Having spoken in this way, the king
was extremely miserable and sighed. Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, lamented for a long time." '
