Bhishma said, "Janadeva, Janaka's descendant, was thus instructed by the supreme rishi. He again asked him
about existence and non-existence after death. 'O illustrious one[The text does not clearly indicate the beginning of a quote. But it is obvious.]! If there is indeed a consciousness after
death, then what is ignorance and what is knowledge? What does one do? O supreme among brahmanas! If it is
seen that all good deeds are destroyed, then what is the difference between being distracted and not being distracted? Whether there is attachment, or whether there is lack of attachment, a being is destroyed. Why should one undertake acts? What should one determine and resolve? What is the truth about this?' He was thus confused, foolish
and enveloped in darkness[The darkness of ignorance.].

'"The wise Panchashika pacified him by speaking these words to him. 'There is no destruction in that excellence[A reference to the state of emancipation.]. Nor is there any existence in that excellence. This is an accumulation of the body, the senses and consciousness. They circle independently, but also influence each other and lead to action. The five branches are the
elements of space, wind, fire, water and earth. They follow their own natures and are naturally distinct. Space,
wind, heat, liquids and earth-these five come together in the body and become one. Knowledge, heat and wind-
these are the three that give rise to action. The senses, the objects of the senses, natural consciousness, the mind,
prana, apana and transformations flow from the elements. Hearing, touch, taste, sight and scent are the five senses
and their qualities result from consciousness. When this is united with knowledge, three kinds of pain are said to
be certain-happiness, unhappiness and the absence of both unhappiness and happiness. Sound, touch, form, taste
and smell-these five exist in the body until the time of death. With the sixth quality of knowledge, they bring
about everything. All acts, renunciation and all determinations about the truth depend on these. Intelligence is said
to be the supreme, great and imperishable seed[Because it leads to emancipation.]. If a person sees the atman in this accumulation of qualities, then
his sight is faulty and his infinite misery will not be destroyed. If a person looks on these as not being the atman,
then he has no sense of ownership. In such a case, sorrow lacks a foundation to which it can attach itself. That is
the reason there is the supreme sacred text known as samyangamana[Literallly, the right state of mind.]. I will expound this to you. For the sake of
your moksha, listen attentively. Renunciation is recommended for all those who wish to be free of their deeds.
However, those who have always been versed in false views have to undergo hardship and sorrow. Deeds are for
renouncing objects. Vows are for renouncing objects of pleasure. The yoga of austerities involves the renunciation
of happiness and terminates in the renunciation of everything. I will tell you about what the learned have described
as the path for renouncing everything. That leads to the alleviation of misery. Anything else leads to hardship. The
five senses of knowledge, and the mind as the sixth, are based in consciousness. I have spoken of the mind as the
sixth and there are the five organs of action. Know that the two hands are the organs of action and the two feet are
the organs of movement. The penis is the organ for procreation and pleasure and the anus is the organ for release.
The mouth is specially for uttering words. Know the movements of these five. With intelligence, there are eleven[Five organs of sense, five organs of action, and intelligence.]
and these must be cast away from the mind. The ears, sound and consciousness-these three are required for hearing. It is the same for touch, form, taste and smell. These fifteen[Each of the five senses being associated with three attributes. Consciousness is a constant. In addition, there is
an organ and something that triggers the organ.] are required for the reception of the qualities.
Three kinds of sentiments also present themselves. These three are sattva, rajas and tamas. In all kinds of attempts,
they lead to three kinds of pain. Jubiliation, delight, happiness, joy, tranquility in consciousness, irrespective of
whether a reason is present or absent for this state of consciousness-these are the qualities of sattva. Dissatisfaction, repentance, sorrow, avarice, lack of forgiveness, irrespective of whether a reason is present or absent-these
are the signs of rajas. Lack of judgement, confusion, distraction, dreaming and excessive sleep, irrespective of how
these have been caused-these are the many qualities of tamas. If there are any signs of delight in the body or the
mind, these should truly be known as the attributes of sattva. If there is any association of repentance or sorrow in
a person, without any reflection, this can be identified to have been caused by rajas. Thus, if there is any confusion
in the body or in the mind, even if it is incomprehensible or indiscernible, that has been caused by tamas. Hearing
originates with sound and the ears base themselves on it. In the science of hearing, one cannot discern any difference between the two[Hearing and sound.]. The skin, the eyes, the tongue and the nose, as the fifth, are also like that. Touch, form,
taste, smell and consciousness are based on the mind. The ten[Five organs of sense and five organs of action.] undertake their own tasks, separately and collectively. Know that consciousness is the eleventh and intelligence is the twelfth. As long as these work together,
tamas cannot be destroyed.Their simultaneous operation is commonly known as conduct. The learning of the sacred texts has earlier determined the working of the senses and the three kinds of qualities have been thought of.
Confused by them, consciousness swiftly roams around amidst what is impermanent. Even at the best of times, this
is said to be tamas happiness. If one does not serve what has been described in all the sacred texts, then one is enveloped in darkness and serves what is false and manifest. These are the thoughts on how dependence on the qualities  leads  to  individual  action.  Some  follow  them  completely  and  some  not  at  all.  There  are  those  who  have
thought about adhyatma. They speak of this accumulation as kshetra and what exists in the mind as kshetrajna.
This being the case, what is destroyed? What is eternal? All beings are driven by these reasons and their natures.
Once a river has entered an ocean, it gives up its name. The spirit is destroyed in that way and no longer has an individuality. This being the case, after death, how can consciousness again be born? The jivatma merges and nothing in the middle can be grasped[Most of this is directed at Buddhist philosophy. The middle is a reference to consciousness, as distinct from the
atman.]. If a person possesses intelligence and knowledge about moksha, without any
distraction, he then desires his own atman and does not get tainted by the fruits of any evil acts. He is like the leaf
of a lotus, sprinkled with water. He is freed from the many firm bonds, whether these arise from offspring or from
the gods[Sacrifices performed for the gods.]. He abandons both happiness and unhappiness. He is freed and goes to the foremost one, who is without any signs. This is the auspicious one. Accepting the proofs of the sacred texts, he then lies down, beyond old
age, death and fear. His good deeds are destroyed. He is beyond the sins too. Therefore, the fruits of these are also
destroyed. The great one is pure, free and without signs. He sees and gets attached to that greatness. When the
strands are severed, a spider that has been stationed there, falls down. Like that, he is freed from his miseries,
which are crushed like rocks on a mountain. A ruru deer casts aside its old horns and a snake its old skin. Like
that, he goes beyond what can be seen and casting aside his miseries, is free. When a tree is about to fall down on
water, a bird abandons it. In that way, he casts aside his happiness and unhappiness. He is free and goes to the
supreme one, who is without any signs. A song is sung about the king of Mithila[This king was Janaka, Janadeva's ancestor.]. When he saw that his city was
being burnt by a fire, he said, "Not even a chaff of mine is being burnt here[Janaka had renounced everything.]." The lord of the earth had himself
said this.' Having heard these words about the immortal objective, spoken by Panchashikha himself, the king of
Videha looked at everything. He ascertained the truth about everything and roamed around in great happiness,
bereft of sorrow. He who reads this, determined to pursue moksha, always considers this and never decays. He
does not suffer miseries because of any calamities. He is freed, like the lord of Mithila after meeting Kapila."'
