Bhishma said, "Satyavati's son obtained this supreme boon from the god. One day, in a desire to create a fire,
he collected two sticks and was rubbing them together. O king! At that time, the illustrious rishi saw the apsara named Ghritachi. She blazed in her energy and her beauty was supreme. O Yudhishthira! In that forest, on
seeing the apsara, the rishi, the illustrious Vyasa, was suddenly overcome by desire. O great king! On seeing that
Vyasa's mind was overwhelmed by desire, Ghritachi assumed the form of a she-parrot and appeared before him.
Seeing the apsara assume a different form, the desire in his body did not vanish, but spread all over his body. The
sage summoned his great fortitude and tried to suppress it. However, Vyasa was unable to control it and his mind
was agitated. What was going to happen was certain to happen. Thus, Ghritachi's body seized him. Wishing to
control it, the sage tried to create a fire. However, his semen suddenly fell down on those sticks. However, without
any anxiety in his mind, the supreme among brahmanas continued to rub those sticks. O king! Through her, the
brahmana rishi had a son named Shuka[Shuka means parrot.]. When the semen fell down, the great ascetic, Shuka, was born. The
supreme rishi and great yogi was  born  from the womb  of  those two  sticks. At  a sacrifice, when  oblations are
poured on the kindling, a blazing fire results. Shuka was born in such a form, flaming in his energy. O Kouravya!
His radiance and supreme beauty and complexion were like that of his father. The one with the clean soul was as
resplendent as a fire blazing without any smoke. O lord of men! In her own personified form, Ganga, best among
rivers, came to the slopes of Meru and bathed him with her water. O Kouravya! O Indra among kings! From the
sky, a staff and a black antelope skin fell down on the ground, for the sake of the great-souled Shuka. Gandharvas
sang and large numbers of apsaras danced. The drums of the gods were sounded with a loud roar. The gandharvas
Vishvavasu, Tumburu and Narada, and the gandharvas Haha and Huhu, praised Shuka's birth. With Shakra at the
forefront, the guardians of the worlds arrived. So did the gods, the devarshis and the brahmana rishis. The wind
god showered down all kinds of divine flowers. Everything in the universe, mobile and immobile, was delighted.
The great-souled and immensely radiant one[Mahadeva.] was delighted. With the goddess[Parvati.], he himself arrived and when
the sage's son was born, performed the sacred thread ceremony, following the proper rites. Shakra, the lord of the
gods, was delighted and gave him a divine and extraordinary kamandalu[Water pot.]and celestial garments. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Swans, shatapatras[Bird with one hundred feathers, can be peacock, parrot, crane or woodpecker.],  thousands  of  cranes  and  blue  jays  circled  around  Shuka.  The immensely radiant one obtained a divine birth from those sticks. He dwelt there, intelligent, controlled and a brahmachari. O great king! As soon as he was born, all the Vedas, with their mysteries and their collections, presented
themselves before him, just as they had before his father. O great king! Thinking about dharma, he[Shuka. Dharma requires one to have a preceptor.] chose Brihaspati, learned about the Vedas, the Vedangas and their commentaries, as his preceptor. He studied all the Vedas,
with their mysteries and their collections. The lord also studied all the histories and the sacred texts about royal
policy. Having given a dakshina to his preceptor, the great sage returned. Controlled and a brahmachari, he started
fierce austerities. Even when he was a child, the gods and the rishis revered him, because of his knowledge and his
austerities. O lord of men! His intelligence found no delight in the three ashramas, with garhasthya as their foundation. He sought insight about the dharma of moksha."'
