'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! I think that destiny is superior to human endeavour, since the soldiers of my sons
are being killed by the soldiers of Pandu. O son[The word used is tata.]! You always tell me that those on my side are being slaughtered and you always tell me that the Pandavas are not being killed and are happy. O Sanjaya! You tell me that
those on my side are devoid of manliness and have fallen down, or are falling down, or are being killed. They are
fighting to the best of their capacity and are endeavouring for victory. But while those on my side are decaying, the
Pandavas are obtaining victory. O son! I am always hearing about the great, terrible and intolerable misery that has
been caused by Duryodhana's misdeeds. O Sanjaya! I do not see any means whereby the Pandavas may decay and
those on my side are able to obtain victory in this battle."

'Sanjaya replied, 'O king! Be patient and listen to the slaughter of the bodies of men and the destruction of elephants, horses and chariots and all of this great evil originates with you. Shalya oppressed Dhrishtadyumna with
nine arrows. He was enraged and oppressed the lord of Madra with iron arrows. We then witnessed Parshata's extraordinary valour, as he swiftly countered Shalya, the adornment of assemblies. As they engaged in battle, no gap
could be seen and the battle between the two seemed to last only for an instant. O great king! In that encounter,
Shalya sliced down Dhrishtadyumna's bow with a broad-headed, yellow and sharp arrow. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! He enveloped him with a shower of arrows and it was like clouds showering down rain on mountains at the time of the monsoon. When Dhrishtadyumna was thus tormented, Abhimanyu became angry. With
great force, he dashed towards the chariot of the king of Madra. Having reached the chariot of the lord of Madra,
Karshni, whose soul was immeasurable, pierced Artayani with three arrows. O king! Those on your side wished to
counter Arjuna's son in battle. They surrounded the chariot of the king of Madra and stationed themselves there. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! O fortunate one! Duryodhana, Vikarna, Duhshasana, Vivimshati, Durmarshana,
Duhsaha, Chitrasena, Durmukha, Satyavrata and Purumitra stationed themselves in battle, so as to protect the chariot of the lord of Madra. O lord of the earth! At this, the angry Bhimasena, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi's
sons, Abhimanyu and the Pandavas who were Madri's sons[There were ten charioteers on the Kourava side and ten on the Pandava side.] discharged many different kinds of weapons. In
great delight, they sought to kill each other. O king! It is because of your evil policy that they engaged in battle.
When that terrible encounter commenced between the ten rathas on either side, all the other rathas, on your side
and on those of the enemy, became spectators. The maharathas discharged many different kinds of weapons. They
roared at each other and struck each other. They were inflamed with anger and desired to kill each other. They
were intolerant of each other and discharged great weapons. Overcome with anger in that great battle, Duryodhana
pierced Dhrishtadyumna with four sharp, swift and terrible arrows. Durmarshana pierced him with twenty, Chitrasena with five, Durmukha with nine arrows, Duhsaha with seven, Vivimshati with five and Duhshasana with
three. O Indra among kings! In return, Parshata, the tormentor of enemies, displayed the dexterity of his hands and
pierced each of them with twenty-five. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, Abhimanyu pierced
Satyavrata and Purumitra with ten arrows each. In that battle, the sons of Madri, the delight of their mother, enveloped their maternal uncle[Shalya was Madri's brother.] with a wonderful torrent of arrows. O great king! The sons of his sister were
supreme charioteers and were repulsing him. But Shalya enveloped them with many arrows. Despite being covered, the sons of Madri did not waver.

'"The immensely strong Bhimasena saw Duryodhana. Pandava grasped a club, thinking that he would bring an
end to the strife. On seeing the mighty-armed Bhimasena with his upraised club, like the peak of Kailasa, your
sons were terrified and fled. However, Duryodhana was angered. With ten thousand swift elephants, he engaged
the army of Magadhas against him[Against Bhima.]. With that army of elephants, and placing the Magadhas in front of him,
King Suyodhana advanced against Bhimasena. Vrikodara saw that army of elephants descending on him. Roaring
like a lion, he leapt down from the chariot, with a club in his hand. He grasped the heavy and great club, with a
heart like that of a mountain. He attacked that army of elephants, like death with a gaping mouth. Killing the elephants with the club, the powerful one wandered around in battle. The mighty-armed Bhimasena was like Vasava
with the vajra. He let out a loud roar and this made the mind and the heart tremble. At Bhima's mighty roar, the
elephants gathered together and lost all power of motion. The sons of Droupadi, Subhadra's maharatha son, Naku-
la, Sahadeva and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna were guarding Bhima's rear. They attacked the elephants with a shower
of arrows, like clouds pouring down on mountains. With razor-sharp and broad-headed arrows and yellow
anjalikas, the Pandavas severed the heads of those who were fighting on elephants[Four types of arrows are mentioned here-kshuras (with tips like razors), kshurapras (arrows with sharp
edges), bhallas (arrows with broad heads) and anjalikas (with heads shaped like crescents).]. The heads fell down and so
did adorned arms and hands with goads held in them. It seemed like a shower of stones. Seated on the backs of elephants, those who were fighting on elephants lost their heads. They looked like broken trees on the summits of
mountains. We saw other large elephants slain and brought down by Dhrishtadyumna, the great-souled Parshata. In
that battle, the king of Magadha advanced on an elephant that looked like Airavata[Indra's elephant.], towards the chariot of Subhadra's son. On seeing Magadha's mighty elephant advance towards him, Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, killed it with an arrow. After depriving him of his elephant, Karshni, the destroyer of enemy cities, used a
broad-headed and silver-shafted arrow to slice off the king's head.

'"Pandava Bhimasena penetrated that army of elephants. He roamed around the field of battle, crushing elephants, like Indra against mountains. In that battle, we saw Bhimasena kill elephants with a single stroke, like
mountains shattered by the vajra. Elephants had broken tusks, broken temples, broken bones, broken backs and
broken heads. They were slain like mountains. They trumpeted and lay down on the ground. Other elephants refused to fight in the battle. Some issued urine. In pain, others issued excrement. We saw dead elephants strewn
along whichever path Bhimasena took, like mountains. Others vomited blood. Other giant elephants had their
frontal globes smashed. Some lost their senses and fell down on the ground, like mountains on the face of the
earth. Bhima wandered around on the field of battle, like death with a staff in his hand. His body was smeared with
fat, blood, lard and marrow. Vrikodara whirled his club, drenched with the blood of elephants. He seemed to be as
terrible as Pinaki, the wielder of Pinaka[Shiva's name is Pinaki and the name of his trident or bow is Pinaka.]. Crushed by the angry Bhimasena, the remaining army of your elephants suddenly fled. The charioteers and great archers, with Subdhadra's son at the forefront, protected the brave
one as he fought, like the wielder of the vajra is by the immortals. He held the club that was drenched in blood and
was himself drenched in the blood of elephants. Bhimasena, terrible in his soul, then seemed to be like death himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We saw him whirl his club in every direction. In that battle, we saw him
dancing around like Shankara. O great king! We saw his terrible, heavy and devastating club, like Yama's staff and
with a sound like that of Indra's vajra. It was covered in hair and marrow and was smeared with blood. It was like
Rudra's Pinaka, when he angrily kills animals. Just as a herdsman uses a stick to drive a herd of animals, your
army of elephants was driven back by Bhima's club. They were killed by that club and by arrows from all directions. Your elephants were scattered and ran away, crushing their own soldiers. Like a great storm that scatters the
clouds, the elephants were driven away in that tumult by Bhima. He stood, like the wielder of the trident[Shiva.] in a
cremation ground."'
