'Brihadashva said, "Having made this agreement with Dvapara, Kali went to the place where the king of the
nishadhas was. Always looking for an opportunity to enter[Enter Nala's body. An act of sin would permit Kali to enter Nala's body and make Nala addictive towards
gambling and dice.], he lived in the land of the nishadhas. After staying
there for twelve years, Kali found his chance. After having passed urine and touching water, nishadha performed
the evening ceremony[The word used is sandhya, which means both dawn and dusk, and the attendant ceremonies. In the translation, we have used the evening sense.], without purifying himself by washing his feet first. Then Kali possessed him. Having
possessed Nala, he went to Pushkara[Pushkara was Nala's brother. The word pushkara also means intoxication.] and told him, 'Come and play dice with Nala. With my help, you are certain to vanquish Nala in a game of dice. O king! Having vanquished King Nala, win over the Nishadha kingdom.'

Thus addressed by Kali, Pushkara went to Kali. Kali went to Pushkara and became a bull among cows[This imagery is difficult to understand. It probably means that Kali became the chief dice with which the
game would be played.].

'"Pushkara, the destroyer of enemy warriors, went to the brave Nala and repeatedly asked his brother to play
dice with the bull[The bull is the dice with Kali inside it.]. At that, the great-souled king was incapable of refusing the challenge. Although Vidarbha's
daughter[Damayanti.] looked on, he decided that the time for setting a stake had come. Having been possessed by Kali, Nala
then lost his silver, his gold[The words hiranya and suvarna are separately used. However, hiranya also means silver or any other precious metal. Since the two words are separately used, we have translated hiranya as silver.], his vehicles, his yokes and his garments. So crazy was he about the dice that none
of his well-wishers could make him refrain from his insensible craving for gambling. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! All the citizens and all the advisers came to see the king so as to restrain the afflicted one. Then the
suta[Nala's charioteer Varshneya.] came and told Damayanti, 'All the citizens are waiting at the gate with a specific purpose. Nishadha
should be told the reason why all the subjects have assembled. They know that the king is learned in dharma and
artha. They are miserable at his addiction.' At that, Bhima's daughter was oppressed with distress. Her mind was
overcome by grief. In a voice choked with tears she told Nishadha, 'O king! The citizens are waiting at the gate
with a desire to see you. They are accompanied by the advisers and all of them are driven by devotion to the king.
They wish to see you.' She said this repeatedly. But the king was possessed by Kali and did not reply at all to the
slim-waisted and bright-eyed one who was lamenting. Then all the citizens and all the advisers decided that his
standing was gone. In shame and misery, they returned home. O Yudhishthira! In this way, the gambling between
Pushkara and Nala went on for several months. Punyashloka kept on losing."'
