'Sanjaya said, "The infinitely energetic Pragjyotisha was Indra's beloved friend. Having killed him, Arjuna circumambulated him. The two sons of the king of Gandhara, the brothers Vrishaka and Achala, the conquerors of
enemy cities, began to afflict Arjuna in the battle. Those two brave archers united and pierced Arjuna severely
from the front and the back, using extremely swift and sharp arrows. In an instant, Partha used sharp arrows to
pierce the horses, charioteer, bow, umbrella, chariot and standard of Vrishaka, Subala's son. Arjuna again used a
storm of arrows and many other weapons. He oppressed the Gandhara soldiers, with Subala's son at the forefront.
There were five hundred brave Gandhara warriors, with their weapons raised. The enraged Dhananjaya used arrows to send them to the world of the dead. With his horses slain, the mighty-armed one[Vrishaka.] quickly descended
from his chariot and ascending onto his brother's chariot, grasped another bow. Those two brothers, Vrishaka and
Achala, were stationed on the same chariot. They repeatedly pierced Bibhatsu with a shower of arrows. Those two
great-souled kings, Vrishaka and Achala, your brothers-in-law, severely wounded Partha, like Indra against Vritra
and Bala. Those two from Gandhara were themselves not injured, but successful in striking the target, again struck
Pandava. It was like the months of summer and monsoon, afflicting the world with sweat and rain[The text should be translated as two months, not several months. An alternative translation of two months of
summer, excluding the monsoon, is also possible.]. Those two
kings, tigers among men, Vrishaka and Achala, were stationed on the same chariot. O king! They were stationed
next to each other and Arjuna slew them with a single arrow. They were like lions, giant-armed and with red eyes.
They were brothers and possessed similar features. Those two brave ones lost their lives and fell down from the
chariot. Their bodies, loved by their relatives, fell down from the chariot onto the ground. They lay there, spreading their sacred fame in the ten directions. O lord of the earth! On seeing that their maternal uncles, who never retreated, had been slain in the battle, your sons fiercely showered down weapons.

'"Shakuni was skilled in a hundred different kinds of maya. On seeing that his brothers had been killed, he confused the two Krishnas with his maya. Sticks, iron balls, shataghnis, javelins, clubs, maces, swords, spears, bludgeons, spikes, kampanas, scimitars, nails, mallets, battleaxes, razors, kshurapras, hollow arrows[Nalikas. However, these can be any hollowed weapon.], vatsadantas,
weapons with joints, chakras, tufted arrows, darts and many other weapons showered down on Arjuna from all the
directions. Asses, camels, buffaloes, lions, tigers, small deer[The word used is srimara. While this is a kind of small deer, in general it also means an animal that frequents
marshy places and has been identified as nilgai.], kites, bears, wolves, vultures, monkeys, reptiles
and many other kinds of flesh-eaters[The word used is rakshasas. But in this context, the more general flesh-eater is more appropriate.] hungrily dashed towards Arjuna. Many diverse kinds of crows angrily
rushed towards him. Kunti's son, the brave Dhananjaya, was skilled in the use of divine weapons. He suddenly unleashed a net of arrows and attacked them. The arrows released by the brave one were firm and excellent and they
were slain by these. They let out a giant wail, as all of them were slain and destroyed. Darkness then appeared and
enveloped Arjuna's chariot[This was part of Shakuni's maya too.]. From within that darkness, a cruel voice censured Arjuna. But Arjuna destroyed
this with the mighty weapon known as jyotisha[Jyotisha has several meanings. It can also be translated as light.]. When that was destroyed, a terrible flood of water appeared.
For destroying this, Arjuna used the weapon named aditya. Thanks to this weapon, the water was almost completely dried up. Subala's son repeatedly resorted to many different kinds of maya. But Arjuna laughed and used the
strength of his weapons to destroy them all. When his maya was destroyed, Shakuni was injured by Arjuna's arrows. He fled on his swift horses, like an ordinary man.

'"Arjuna was the best among those who were skilled in the use of weapons and he showed his nature to the enemy. He showered down a flood of arrows on the Kourava army. The army of your son was slaughtered by Partha.
O great king! It became divided into two, like the Ganga when it confronts a mountain. O king! Some maharathas
sought shelter with Drona. Others were afflicted by Kiriti and went to Duryodhana. Since they were covered by
darkness, we could not see the soldiers or him then. I heard the twang of Gandiva on my south[Alternatively, my right.]. There was the
sound of conch shells and drums and the noise of musical instruments. Gandiva's roar could be heard above all of
these. A fight then again commenced towards the south, between wonderful warriors and Arjuna. However, I followed Drona. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that time, the many different divisions in your son's army
were slaughtered by Arjuna, like the wind scattering clouds in the sky. Like Vasava raining down copiously, the
great archer and tiger among men showered down a flood of arrows and no one could counter the fierce one. Those
on your side were killed by Partha and were severely afflicted. As they fled hither and thither, they killed many on
their own side. The arrows shot by Arjuna were tufted with the feathers of herons and were capable of penetrating
the body. They descended like locusts that covered the ten directions. O venerable one! Horses, charioteers, elephants were pierced and the arrows then penetrated the ground, like snakes into a termite hill. He did not shoot a
second arrow at any elephant, horse or man. Shot by a single arrow, they fell down, losing their lives. Men and
horses were slain everywhere. Elephants were struck by arrows and brought down. At that time, dogs, jackals and
wild crows howled and the field of battle looked wonderful. Oppressed by arrows, father abandoned son, wellwisher abandoned well-wisher and son abandoned father. Everyone sought to protect himself. Oppressed by
Partha, they abandoned their mounts."'
