Bhishma said, "Once, Janaka's son was roaming around in a desolate forest. In the course of the hunt, he saw a
brahmana rishi who was Bhrigu's descendant. Vasuman bowed his head down before the seated sage and also
sat down. Having taken his permission, he then asked him a question. 'O illustrious one! What brings the greatest
benefit, in this world and in the next, to a man who possesses a temporary body, but is overcome by desire?' Having been honoured and asked, the great-souled and great ascetic was gratified and spoke these beneficial words. 'If
your mind desires what is positive in this world and in the next, then you must control your senses and restrain
yourself from causing injury to beings. Dharma brings benefit to those who are virtuous. Dharma is the refuge of
those who are virtuous. O son! It is from dharma that the three worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects, are
generated. You wish for the taste of desire. Why have you not become satiated with these? O evil-minded one! You
see the honey, but not the downfall[The image is of a man who climbs a tree in search of honey, but falls down and dies.]. A person who seeks the fruits of knowledge must pursue it. Like that, a person who seeks the fruits of dharma must pursue it. If a wicked person desires dharma, it will be extremely difficult
for him to perform pure deeds. However, if a virtuous person desires dharma, it is extremely easy for him to perform those difficult deeds. If one dwells in the forest but pursues what would bring happiness in a village, then one
is just like a villager. Similarly, if one dwells in a village but pursues what would bring happiness in the forest,
then one is just like a forest dweller. Controlling yourself faithfully, observe dharma in thoughts, words and deeds.
Examine the good and the bad aspects of attachment and detachment. Without any malice, always donate a lot to
virtuous people who ask for it, but bearing the time and the place in mind and honouring them with vows and purification. One should earn through auspicious means and then give it away. When giving, one must discard anger
and not be tormented at having given. Nor should one boast about it. Non-violent, pure, self-controlled, truthful in
words, upright, pure in birth and deeds and learned in the Vedas-such a brahmana is a worthy recipient. He must
have been born from a virtuous mother who has had only one husband. He must know about Rig, Sama and Yajur
and must perform the six tasks[Recommended for brahmanas-performing sacrifices, officiating at the sacrifices of others, studying, teaching,
receiving and giving.]. Such a recipient is said to be a deserving one. If one does not consider the time
and the place and performs the act of giving to an undeserving person, a man acts in a contrary way and dharma
becomes adharma. A man can clean a little dirt on the body easily. More requires greater effort. In that way, much
effort needs to be made to dispel great sin. After easing oneself, clarified butter is a good medication. In that way,
once one has cleansed the sins and follows dharma, this brings happiness in the hereafter. There is good and evil in
the minds of all beings. One must withdraw from the evil and use the good to cross. One must be attached to one's
own dharma and desire that dharma. You do not possess patience. Cultivate patience. You do not possess intelligence. Cultivate intelligence. You do not possess tranquility. Cultivate tranquility. You  do  not possess  wisdom.
Cultivate wisdom. If one associates with the right people, one is capable of using one's energy to obtain what is
beneficial in this world and in the next. Fortitude is the foundation for this. Because of lack of fortitude, rajarshi
Mahabhisha fell down from heaven. Yayati obtained the worlds through his fortitude, but fell down when his merits were exhausted. Serve ascetics who are devoted to dharma and are learned. You will then obtain great intelligence and the welfare that you desire.' His[Vasuman's.] natural disposition was good and he heard the words spoken by the
sage. He withdrew his mind from desire and turned his intelligence towards dharma."'
