Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After having crossed the white mountains, the brave
one arrived at the land where the Kimpurushas lived. They were protected by Drumaputra. There was a great battle
in which many kshatriyas were slain. The best of the Pandavas won and extracted tribute. The son of the chastiser
of Paka used his army and determination to conquer the region known as Hataka, protected by Guhyaka. Having
won them over with conciliation, he set his eyes on the supreme Laka Manasa. He also saw all the places sacred to
the rishis. On reaching Manasa, the lord Pandava conquered the regions around Hataka, protected by the gandharvas. As tribute, he obtained from the city of the gandharvas supreme horses that were the colour of partridges and
speckled, with eyes like those of frogs. Pandava, son of the chastiser of Paka, then arrived at the northern country
of Harivarsha and wished to conquer it too.

'On seeing him, some doorkeepers appeared. They were giant in form, great in valour and immense in strength.
They smilingly told him, "O Partha! You are incapable of conquering this city in any way. O Achyuta[One who has no decay, a name usually used for Krishna.]! If you
desire your own welfare, turn back. You already have enough. Any human who enters this city must certainly die.
O valorous one! We are pleased with you. Your conquests are already many. O Arjuna! Nothing can be seen here
that is left for you to conquer. This is the land of the Northern Kurus and there cannot be any wars here. O
Kounteya! Even if you enter, you will not be able to see anything. Nothing that is here can be seen with human
eyes. O tiger among men! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, if there is anything else that you wish,
please tell us. We will do your bidding." Having been thus addressed, Arjuna, son of the chastiser of Paka said, "I
wish that the intelligent Dharmaraja should become an emperor. I shall not enter this land if it is restricted to humans. But let something be given by you as tribute to Yudhishthira." Then they gave him divine garments, divine
ornaments and divine hides and skins as tribute.

'Thus did that tiger among men conquer the northern regions. He fought many great battles, with kshatriyas, and
also with bandits. Having conquered those kings, he extracted tribute from them and obtained a lot of riches and
many jewels, together with horses that had the colour of partridges, were speckled, or had the colour of parrot
feathers or those of peacocks. They were all as swift as the wind. O king! Surrounded by a gigantic fourfold army,
the brave one returned again to the supreme city of Shakraprastha.'
