'"Damayanti said, 'O mother! I tell you truthfully. If you wish to see me alive, please arrange it so that Nala, the
brave one among men, is brought here."

'Brihadashva said, "Thus addressed by Damayanti, the queen was extremely distressed. O king! Her voice choking with tears, there was no reply that she could give. On seeing her in this state, everyone in the inner quarters began to weep and lament grievously. O great king! Then Bhima's wife spoke to him. 'Your daughter Damayanti is
sorrowing on account of her husband. O king! Unrestrained by shame, she herself told me this. Ask your messengers to make efforts to find Punyashloka.' Thus asked by her, the king sent brahmanas who were in his service in
every direction, with instructions that they should try to find Nala. Thus instructed by the king of Vidarbha, the
bulls among the brahmanas came and told Damayanti that they were leaving. Bhima's daughter then told them that
in every country and at every place where men gathered, they should repeatedly utter the following words. 'O
gambler! O loved one! You are the one who sliced off half my garment. Where are you? You abandoned your
beloved wife in a deserted region. It is in accordance with your instructions that she is still awaiting you, clad only
in half a garment. The lady is tormented by grief. O lord of the earth! She repeatedly weeps because of that sorrow.
O brave one! Show her your favour and reply to her words.' She told them that, as a mark of favour towards her,
these were the words that they should utter, because a fire that has the wind with it burns down the forest. They
should also say, 'The husband is always bound to protect and maintain his wife. You are learned in dharma. Why
do you ignore these duties? You are famous, wise and kind and have been born to a noble lineage. But I fear that
you have now become cruel and that is the reason my fortune has turned. O bull among men! O great archer! Show
compassion towards me. You have often told me that compassion is the supreme dharma.' She told them that if
anyone responded to these words, they should find out everything about that man and where he lived. 'O supreme
among brahmanas! If any man replies to your words, convey those words immediately to me. After accomplishing
your task, you must return here immediately, so that he does not find out that you are there on Bhima's instructions. Whether he is rich or poor, or desirous of riches, you must find out what it is that he desires.' O king! Having
heard these words, the brahmanas went out in all the directions.

'"They searched for the sinner Nala. They went to cities, countries, villages, places where there were cowherds
and hermitages. O lord of the earth! Everywhere, the brahmanas repeated exactly the words Damayanti had asked
them to utter."'
