'Bhimasena said, "O Madhusudana! You should speak in such a way that the Kurus resort to peace. Do not frighten them with war. He is intolerant and is always angry. That extremely spirited one hates prosperity in others. One
should not address strong words towards Duryodhana. One should act peacefully towards him. His disposition is
naturally wicked. His mind is equal to that of a dasyu. He is intoxicated with prosperity and bears enmity towards
the Pandavas. He does not have far-sightedness and is cruel. He is deceitful and wicked in his valour. His anger
lasts for a long time and the evil-souled one is fond of deceit. Even if he dies, he will not surrender, or give up
what he thinks belongs to him. O Krishna! I think that peace with someone like that is extremely difficult. He does
not listen to the words of his well-wishers. He has discarded dharma. He loves falsehood. He goes against the
words and intentions of his well-wishers. Overcome by anger, his nature is based on wickedness. His natural
wickedness is like that of a snake provoked with a straw. You know everything about Duryodhana's soldiers, their
conduct, their nature, their strength and their valour. In earlier times, the Kurus, together with their sons, were content and so were we. We rejoiced with our relatives, like Indra's seniors. O Madhusudana! But because of Duryodhana's anger, the Bharatas will burn, like a forest burns with fire at the end of winter.

'"O Madhusudana! Eighteen kings are famous as those who annihilated their kin, their well-wishes and their relatives. At the end of the period of dharma[The end of satya yuga.], Bali was born among the asuras. He was prosperous and blazed in his
energy. Udavarta was born among the Haihayas, Janamejaya among the Nipas, Bahula among the Talajanghas, the
insolent Vasu among the Krimis, Ajabindu among the Suviras, Kusharddhika among the Surashtras, Arkaja among
the Balihas, Dhoutamulaka among the Chinas, Hayagriva among the Videhas, Varapra among the Mahoujasas,
Bahu among the Sundaravegas, Pururava among the Diptakshas, Sahaja among the Chedi-Matysas, Brihadbala
among the Prachetas, Dharana among the Indra-Vatsas, Vigahana among the Mukutas and Shama among the Nandivegas. They defiled their lineages. O Krishna! They were the worst of men and were born at the end of the yuga.
At the end of a yuga[The end of dvapara yuga.], driven by destiny, Duryodhana has now been born in the lineage of the Kurus. He is the
worst of his lineage. He is a wicked and evil man. Therefore, speak softly to him, in conformity with dharma and
artha. Act generally in accordance with his desires and do not exhibit terrible valour before him. O Krishna! We
would rather follow Duryodhana and be under his control, than let the lineage of the Bharatas be destroyed. O Vasudeva! Act so that he and the other Kurus become indifferent towards us. Otherwise, the Kurus will be destroyed.
O Krishna! Speak to the aged grandfather and the courtiers, so that there is fraternity among the brothers and Dhritarashtra's son is pacified. This is why I say and the king[Yudhishthira.] approves. Arjuna has never been in favour of war, because there is great compassion in Arjuna."'
