Vaishampayana said, 'Vyasa dispelled the grief of the eldest son of Pandu, who was tormented by grief on account
of his kin and wished to give up his life.

'Vyasa said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. O tiger among men! O Yudhisthira! This is
known as Ashma's song. Listen to it. King Janaka of Videha was overcome by sorrow, misery and doubt and asked
a wise brahmana named Ashma.

'"Janaka asked, 'When relatives and riches come and go, how should a man who desires his own welfare
behave?'

'"Ashma replied, 'As soon as the atman arises inside a man's body, all unhappiness and happiness are attached
to it. Both of these are possible. But whichever of these he serves, overtakes his consciousness, just as the wind
drives away clouds. "I have been born in a noble lineage. I am successful. I am not an ordinary man." His consciousness becomes sprinkled with these three kinds of sentiments. He becomes addicted to pleasures and gives up
the wealth accumulated by his ancestors. When this is destroyed, he thinks that even stealing the property of others
is good. He transgresses codes of honour and seizes what has not been given. Kings counter such greedy ones like
animals with arrows. O king! Such men live for twenty years, or thirty years. They never attain one hundred
years[The normal lifespan expected for a man.]. They are full of great misery. Using one's intelligence, one must glance here and there, at the conduct of
all beings, and determine a medicine for them[The king must find an antidote for these suffering subjects.]. All mental sorrow is because of delusion of consciousness or the
onset of a catastrophe. There is no third reason. The various kinds of sorrow a man faces is because of the external
or the internal[A little bit of liberty has been taken in translating this shloka.]. Old age and death are like two wolves that devour all beings, whether they are strong or weak,
short or tall. There is no man who can escape from old age and death, even if it is someone who has conquered the
earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. Whether a being is confronted with happiness or unhappiness, all of it must
be accepted and cannot be avoided. O lord of men! They must be faced in young age, middle age, or old age and
cannot be avoided. But that which is wished for[Freedom from old age and death.] never arrives. There is separation from that which is pleasant
and association with that which is unpleasant. Following destiny, there is prosperity, adversity, happiness and unhappiness. The birth of beings, the giving up of their bodies, and gain and loss, have all been ordained. Smell,
colour, taste and touch are naturally determined. Like that, happiness and unhappiness have been ordained. Depending on time, all beings observe sitting, lying down, going, getting up, drinking and eating. Physicians fall ill.
The strong become extremely weak. They have women, or become eunuchs. Such is the wonderful progress of
time. Birth in a noble lineage, valour, recovery from disease, patience, good fortune and pleasure-all of these are
the result of destiny. Even if they do not wish to, the poor have many sons. Even if they wish for many and also
try, the rich may have none. Disease, fire, water, weapons, hunger, predatory beasts, poison, rope and fall from
height-these can be the reasons for a being's death. One's departure is determined by destiny and one follows that
reason. No one has been seen to cross it. Nor will anyone cross it. O lord of men! It is seen that a prosperous man
may die when he is young, and though he is in misery, a poor person may live for one hundred years. A man who
has nothing is seen to live for a long time. However, a person who has been born in a noble lineage is destroyed
like an insect. O lord of men! In this world, it is often the case that a prosperous person does not have the capacity
to eat anything. But a poor person is capable of digesting wood. Driven by destiny, an evil-acting person or one
who is not content, convinces his soul that what he is doing is good and thinks, "I am the doer." Women, gambling
with the dice, hunting, drinking and acts that are condemned by the wise-many extremely learned ones are seen
to be addicted to various such vices. Because of the progress of time, whether they are desired or not desired, many
things are seen to touch all beings. However, the cause is not comprehended. Wind, the sky, fire, the moon, the sun,
day, night, the stars, the rivers, the mountains-who has created them and who supports them? O bull among men!
Cold, heat and rain are brought about by the circling of time and happiness and unhappiness in men is like that.
Herbs, learned texts, oblations and meditations cannot save a man who faces death or old age. Just as a log of
wood touches another log of wood in the great ocean, beings approach one another, touch and then drift away.
Some men are in the company of women, with singing and the playing of musical instruments. Others are without
protectors and depend on others for food. Time acts equally towards both. In this cycle of life[Through the succession of births.], beings may have
thousands of mothers and fathers and hundreds of sons and wives. But whom do they belong to? Whom do we belong to? No one belongs to a person. Nor does a person ever belong to anyone. Along the path, one meets large
numbers of wives, relatives and well-wishers. Where was I? Where am I? Where am I going? Who am I? Why am
I here? Who am I grieving for? Thinking in this way, one can pacify one's mind. One revolves in this cycle of life,
and the association with the ones one loves is temporary. The world hereafter has not been seen. Nor can it be
seen. Learned ones know about it. One should not doubt the sacred texts, but be full of devotion. One must follow
dharma in acts towards the ancestors and the gods. In accordance with the prescribed rites, the learned must perform sacrifices and follow the three goals[Dharma, artha and kama.]. This entire universe is submerged in the deep ocean of time. Old age
and death are the giant sharks[Alternatively, crocodiles.]. But there are few who understand this. There are many physicians who have
studied ayurveda[The science of health and medicine.] and nothing else. Even they are seen to be afflicted by disease. They drink bitter and oily potions. However, they cannot cross death, like the giant ocean against the shoreline. There are chemists who are extremely accomplished in chemistry. They are seen to be shattered by old age, like trees shattered by great elephants. There are those who torment themselves through austerities, are engaged in studying, give generously and
perform sacrifices. But even they cannot overcome old age and death. Once beings have been born, days, months,
years, fortnights and nights cannot be rolled back. Man is powerless and his existence is uncertain. He must tread
this extensive and certain path of time, followed by all beings. Irrespective of whether the soul exists independent
of life or whether life exists independent of the soul[We have translated this as soul. But this doesn't mean the atman. It means
the linga-sharira, the subtle body made out of subtle elements, as opposed to
the gross body.], we meet our wives and other relatives along the path.
There never is any permanent association with anyone. There is none with one's own body. How can there be with
anyone else? O king! Where is your father now? Where is your grandfather? They can't see you now. Nor can you
see them. There is no man who can see heaven or hell. O king! The sacred texts are the eyes of the virtuous. Act
accordingly. Act like a brahmachari. Then procreate and perform sacrifices. Without any malice, repay the debt to
ancestors, gods and maharshis. He[The king.] must perform sacrifices. He must procreate and generate offspring, after having practised brahmacharya first. He must divide himself into two[This is probably a reference to the son being regarded as the father reborn.
Alternatively, it can be a division between brahmacharya and garhasthya.]. He must worship heaven and this world. In
this way, his heart will be freed from that which is false. The king who practises dharma and acquires objects in the
proper way extends his fame in all the worlds, mobile and immobile, and keeps the wheel turning.'"

'Vyasa said, "The king of Videha understood all these words, which were full of reason. Having heard this, his
intelligence became completely refined. He took Ashma's leave and, with his sorrow pacified, went towards his
own house. O one without decay! In that way, free yourself from this grief. You are like Shakra. Arise in delight.
You have won the earth through the dharma of kshatriyas. O son of Kunti! Enjoy and do not grieve."'
