'"Arjuna asked, 'O supreme among men! What is that brahman, what is the individual atman 308 and what is action? What is said to underlie all beings and what is said to underlie all gods? 309 O Madhusudana! Who underlies
all yajnas 310 in this body and how? By those who can control their atmans, how are you known at the time of
death?'

'"The lord said, 'The indestructible brahman is the supreme spirit and its inhabitation of individual beings is
called adhyatma. Action is the offering 311 that leads to the creation and sustenance of all beings. O supreme
among those who possess bodies! Perishable elements are adhibhuta and the purusha is adhidaiva. In this body, I
myself am adhiyajna. At the time of death, he who remembers me, gives up his body and leaves, he attains my essence. There is no doubt about this. O Kounteya! Whatever essence is remembered at the time of death, giving up
the body, a person immersed in that essence is the essence that he attains. Therefore, always think of me. And
fight. With mind and intellect offered to me, you will without doubt attain me alone. O Partha! United in the practice that is like yoga, without following anyone else, thinking of the divine supreme spirit with the mind, attains
that. 312 He who thinks of the omniscient, without beginning, the controller of everything, finer than the minutest,
the upholder of everything, with a form that is beyond thought, self-resplendent like the sun and beyond darkness,
313 at the time of death, 314 with devotion, with the mind fixed, with the strength of yoga used to hold the breath
of life between the brows, he attains the resplendent supreme spirit. He is the one whom those who know the
Vedas speak of as indestructible, he is the one into whom unattached yogis enter, he is the one to attain when brahmacharya is practised, I will briefly tell you about reaching that goal of supreme liberation.

'"'Using all the senses and organs 315 to control the mind and restrain it in the heart, bearing the breath of life
between the brows, establishing one's atman in yoga, uttering the single syllable Om that is the brahman and remembering me, he who gives up his body and leaves, he attains the goal of supreme liberation. O Partha! He who
does not think of other things and remembers me every day and all the time, I am easily attainable to that yogi who
is always focused. 316 Great souls who attain me, because they have achieved supreme liberation, are freed from
rebirth, which is transient and the abode of sorrow. O Arjuna! From all the worlds up to brahmaloka, beings have
to return. 317 But O Kounteya! There is no rebirth for those who have attained me. 318 Those who know that a
thousand yugas are Brahma's day and a thousand yugas are Brahma's night know the truth about day and night.
319 When Brahma's day arrives, every manifest object is created from the unmanifest. When Brahma's night arrives, like that, everything dissolves into the unmanifest. These 320 are the beings who are born again and again
and destroyed when night arrives. O Partha! When day arrives, they are involuntarily created again. But superior to
that unmanifest is the other supreme and eternal unmanifest being that is not destroyed when all beings are destroyed. 321 What is spoken of as the unmanifest and indestructible, what is said to be the supreme liberation, attaining which beings do not have to return, that is my supreme abode. O Partha! All beings are established in that.
And by that is everything pervaded. That supreme purusha can only be attained through unwavering devotion. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about the road 322 which, if traversed, doesn't lead to yogis
being reborn and about the road which, if traversed, leads to rebirth. The resplendence of the fire, the day, the
bright half of the lunar month, 323 the six months when the sun heads north, 324 along that path those who worship the brahman attain the brahman. 325 Smoke, night, the dark half of the lunar month 326 and the six months
when the sun heads south, 327 along that path, the yogi attains the energy of the moon and returns again. 328 In
this world, these two paths of light and darkness are said to be eternal. One leads to non-return and the other leads
to return. O Partha! Knowing these two paths, a yogi is never deluded. O Arjuna! Therefore, at all times, resort to
yoga. Knowing the prescribed good fruit that accrues from knowledge of the Vedas, yajnas, practice of austerities
and donation of alms, the yogi transcends all these and attains the supreme and original abode.'"'
