Vaishampayana said, 'When Bhishma had left the forefront of that battle and had run away, Dhritarashtra's great-
souled son raised up his standard and himself advanced towards Arjuna. Dhananjaya, extremely valorous and
wielder of the terrible bow, was roaming around in the midst of the enemy hordes. He drew his bow up to his ears
and with an arrow pierced him in the middle of his forehead[That is, Duryodhana pierced Arjuna.]. The arrow's tip was extremely sharp and golden. O
king! Struck by it, the performer of great deeds looked as beautiful as a mountain with a single peak. Pierced by
the arrow, warm blood gushed out of the wound. The golden arrow was as beautiful as a flowery garland. Struck
by the arrow, he was angered and rushed at Duryodhana in wrath. He took out arrows that were like poison and fire
and spiritedly pierced the king[Duryodhana.]. Duryodhana was extremely energetic and attacked Partha and the brave one[Arjuna.]
attacked Duryodhana alone. Those two brave ones among men fought each other. They were both equal and were
born in the lineage of Ajamidha[Ajamidha was a common ancestor.]. Vikarna also rode on a gigantic and rutting elephant that was as large as a
mountain and with four chariots protecting the elephant's legs, attacked Kunti's son, Jishnu. That Indra among elephants swiftly bore down on him. Dhananjaya grasped an extremely swift iron arrow. Drawing his bow up to his
ears, he pierced it between its temples. The arrow released by Partha was shafted with the feathers of vultures. It
penetrated the elephant, right up to the feathers. Like the vajra released by Indra shatters a mountain, it shattered
the one that was like a mountain[The elephant.]. The king of elephants was tormented by that arrow. Its limbs began to tremble
and its soul was distressed. It slowly fell down on the ground, like the peak of a mountain that has been struck by a
thunderbolt. When the supreme of tusked ones fell down on the ground, Vikarna was terrified and dismounted
swiftly. He fled for a full eight hundred paces and climbed onto Vivimshati's chariot. Having slain the elephant
with the arrow, like the vajra strikes down a mountain or a cloud, Partha used a similar arrow to pierce Duryodhana on the chest. The elephant and the king having both been pierced, Vikarna having been routed with the infantry that guarded him, the foremost among warriors were frightened of the arrows released from Gandiva, and
swiftly fled.

'Having seen that the elephant had been killed with an arrow and that all the warriors had run away, the foremost among Kurus[Duryodhana.] retreated on his chariot from the field of battle and went to a spot where Partha was not
present. But Kiriti was still eager to do battle. The destroyer of enemies addressed Duryodhana, who had been
pierced by the arrow and was vomiting blood, and was swiftly trying to run away in terrible fright. Arjuna said,
"Renounce your deeds and great fame. Why are you running away in this way and refraining from battle? Why
aren't trumpets being sounded for you now, the way they were sounded when you set out to do battle? I obediently
follow Yudhishthira's instructions. I am the third of the Parthas[Partha means son of Pritha (Kunti) and Yudhishthira, Bhima and Arjuna are all Parthas.] and I am steadfast in battle. Therefore, turn
around and show me your face. O son of Dhritarashtra! Remember how Indras among men[Kings.] are supposed to act.
You have been named Duryodhana earlier, but that name will be uttered on earth in vain[Duryodhana means someone who it is difficult to fight with.]. There is no Duryodhana left in you. You are running away and refraining from battle. I do not see anyone to protect Duryodhana, either at the front or at the back. O foremost among Kurus! Therefore, run away from the battle. Protect your
beloved life from the Pandava."'
