'Sanjaya said, "O king! On seeing that Vasudeva and Dhananjaya had penetrated, the kings on your side were immersed in fear. All of those great-souled ones were both angry and ashamed and were immobile. But having been
urged by their spirits, they proceeded towards Dhananjaya. However, those who were driven by anger and intolerance and went to fight with Pandava did not return, like rivers heading towards the ocean. Those who were not virtuous fled, like atheists turning away from the Vedas. They committed sins and served the cause of hell. Those two
bulls among men crossed over and freed themselves from that array of chariots and could be seen, like the sun and
the moon freed from Rahu's mouth[The text uses the word prabhakara, but in the dual. Prabhakara can mean either the sun or the moon. Since the
dual is used, both are meant.]. They were like fish that had broken through a large net and were now devoid of fever. Thus did the two Krishnas look, after having broken through that net of soldiers. They freed themselves from Drona's extremely impenetrable array, obstructed by weapons. Those great-souled ones were seen, like
suns that had arisen at the end of a yuga. They were liberated from that obstruction of weapons and freed from that
danger of weapons. Those great-souled ones could now be seen, creating obstructions for the enemy. It was as if
they had been freed from the touch of a fire, or like fish freed from the mouth of a makara. Instead, those two agitated the soldiers, like a couple of makaras in the ocean. When they were stationed inside Drona's array, those on
your side and your sons had held the view that they would not be able to cross beyond Drona. O great king! On
seeing that those two immensely radiant ones had passed beyond Drona's array, they were no longer assured about
the king of Sindhu remaining alive. O king! O lord! Earlier, your sons had possessed the strong hope that the two
Krishnas would not be able to free themselves from Drona and Hardikya. O great king! But negating those hopes,
those two scorchers of enemies passed beyond Drona's array and Bhoja's impenetrable array. Having crossed, they
were seen to be like blazing fires. Everyone was driven to despair and was certain that the king of Sindhu would no
longer remain alive.

'"Krishna and Dhananjaya began to fearlessly converse among themselves about Jayadratha's slaying, thus increasing the terror of the enemy. 'He has been placed in the midst of six maharathas from the side of Dhritarashtra.
But once he is seen, Saindhava will not escape us. Even if he is protected in the battle by Shakra and the masses of
gods, I will still kill him.' This is what he[Arjuna.] told Krishna. Thus did the two mighty-armed Krishnas converse with
each other, while looking for the king of Sindhu. Your sons heard this. They were like two thirsty elephants that
had passed through a desert and were now assured after having drunk water. Those two scorchers of enemies
seemed to have crossed over mountains infested by tigers, lions and elephants. Those mighty-armed ones seemed
to have overcome death and disease. On seeing that those two had been freed, all those on your side shrieked and
thought that the complexion on their faces[The faces of Krishna and Arjuna.] was terrible. They had been freed from Drona, who was like a virulent serpent, or as if from a blazing fire, and also from the other kings. They were as radiant as two suns. Those
two scorchers of enemies had been freed from Drona's array, which was like an ocean. They were seen to be extremely delighted, like those who had crossed a sea. They had been freed from a great shower of weapons, protected by Drona and Hardikya. They were seen to be blazing in that battle, like Indra or Agni. Because of the sharp arrows of Bharadvaja's son, there was blood on the two Krishnas and they were as beautiful as mountains with
karnikara trees. They had crossed over a lake in which Drona was the crocodile, lances were virulent serpents, iron
arrows were makaras and kshatriyas were the deep water. They had been freed from the cloud that was Drona's
weapons, where thunder was the twang of bowstrings and the slapping of palms and clubs and swords were the
lightning. They were like the sun and the moon, freed of darkness. With their arms, they had swum across the six
rivers that head to the ocean[The six rivers are probably Sindhu, Vitasta, Chandrabhaga, Iravati, Vipasha and Shatadru.], at the end of the summer, when the waters are overflowing and are also infested
with giant crocodiles. The two Krishnas were great archers and their renown was famous in the world. But all the
beings were astounded at their having withstood the strength of Drona's weapons.

'"Having approached, they looked around for Jayadratha, driven by the desire to kill. They looked like two
tigers who wished to descend on ruru deer. O great king! Such was the complexion on their faces that all your warriors thought that Jayadratha had already been slain. The mighty-armed Krishna and Pandava were together and
their eyes were coppery red. They were delighted on seeing the king of Sindhu and roared repeatedly. The resplendence of Shouri with the reins and Partha with the bow was like that of the sun or the fire. They were delighted at
having been freed from Drona's array and at having seen that Saindhava was nearby, like two hawks at the sight of
meat. On seeing that Saindhava was present nearby, they were like two hawks at the sight of meat. They descended, swiftly, angrily and suddenly.

'"Having seen that Hrishikesha and Dhananjaya had crossed[Crossed the armies of Drona and Kritavarma.], your valiant son, King Duryodhana, wished to
protect the king of Sindhu. O lord! He had the armour that Drona had fastened on him. He was skilled in handling
horses and rushed on a single chariot. Your son overtook the great archers, Krishna and Partha[Having overtaken them, Duryodhana placed himself between them and Jayadratha.]. O lord of men!
Having gone on ahead, he turned and faced Pundarikaksha. At this, all the soldiers delightedly sounded musical
instruments, since your son had overtaken Dhananjaya. There were roars like lions, mixed with sounds of conch
shells and drums, on seeing that Duryodhana was stationed there, in front of the two Krishnas. O lord! There were
also those, like fires, who had been assigned to protect the king of Sindhu. In that battle, they were also delighted
to see your son. O king! On seeing that Duryodhana and his followers had crossed them, Krishna spoke these
words, which were appropriate for the occasion, to Arjuna."'
