'Bhishma said, "The wise have said that austerities are the foundation of
everything. A stupid person who has not been tormented through austerities
does not obtain the fruits of his deeds. The lord Prajapati created everything
here through austerities. The rishis acquired the Vedas through austerities.
The siddhas perform austerities in the due order and subsist on fruits, roots
and the wind. Extremely controlled, they can see the three worlds through
their austerities. Herbs and other medications and the three types of
learning[The three Vedas.] are perfected and made successful through austerities. Austerities are the foundation of all endeavour. Everything that is difficult to obtain, difficult to name, difficult to assail and difficult to withstand-all this
can be made possible through austerities. There is nothing that can surpass
austerities. A sinful man who drinks liquor, seizes objects of others without
permission, kills foetuses and violates the bed of his preceptor-can be
freed if he torments himself well through austerities. Austerities have many
forms and many gates through which they flow. Among the austerities that
involve restraint, abstention from food is the best. O great king! Non-violence, truthfulness in speech, donations, restraint of the senses-abstention
from food is superior to these austerities too. There is nothing more difficult
than giving and no ashrama that surpasses the mother. There is nothing that
is superior to the three kinds of learning. Renunciation is the supreme austerity. In this world, the senses protect riches and grain. But in this protection of dharma, artha and austerities, there is nothing superior to abstention
from food. The rishis, the ancestors, the gods, humans, the best of animals
and all other beings, mobile and immobile-all of them are devoted to austerities. They become successful through austerities. It is through austerities
that the gods attained greatness. They always obtained their desirable shares
and fruits through austerities. It has been determined that through austerities, one can even attain divinity."'
