'Yudhishthira asked, "O supreme among eloquent ones! What was the valour of King Somaka? I wish to hear accurately about his deeds and his powers."

'Lomasha said, "O Yudhishthira! There was a king named Somaka, devoted to dharma. O king! He had one hundred wives, all equal to one another. Though he made great efforts, a son was not born to the lord of the earth, despite a long period of time having passed. One day, after he had grown old and continued to make efforts, a son
named Jantu was born to him from those one hundred wives. O lord of the earth! When he was born, all those
mothers surrounded him and always gave him everything that might bring him pleasure. One day, an ant bit Jantu
on his hips and the child cried out in pain at this bite. Then all the mothers were extremely distressed. They surrounded Jantu and raised a great lamentation. The lord of the earth suddenly heard these loud cries, while he was
seated in the midst of his advisers and priests. The king sent for news about what had occurred and the steward
brought him news about what had happened to his son. Somaka swiftly arose with his advisers and went to the inner quarters. The chastiser of enemies consoled his son. Having consoled his son, the king emerged from the inner
quarters. O king! He sat down with his advisers and priests.

'"Somaka said, 'Shame on having a single son. It is better to have none. All beings are always prone to distress
and a single son is cause for misery. O brahmana! O lord[This is in the singular. So Somaka is addressing the chief priest.]! I examined these one hundred wives and married
them for the sake of obtaining sons. But they did not produce offspring. As I endeavoured with all of them, somehow this single son named Jantu was born. What can be greater misery than that? O supreme among brahmanas!
My time has passed and so has that of my wives[That is, they have grown old.]. Their lives are dependent on this single son and that is also
the way for me. Isn't there some ceremony or deed, large, small or difficult, so that I can obtain one hundred
sons?' The officiating priest replied, 'There is such a deed, so as to obtain one hundred sons. O Somaka! If you can
perform it, I will explain it to you.' Somaka said, 'Whether it is a good deed or a bad one, if it can get me one hundred sons, know that I will perform it. O illustrious one! Explain it to me.' The officiating priest replied, 'O king! I
will perform the rite and you will sacrifice Jantu. Then, within a short while, one hundred fortunate sons will be
born. When he is offered in the sacrifice, his mothers will inhale the smoke and all of them will give birth to extremely valorous sons. Jantu will also be born as your son from the same woman. A golden mark will be seen on
his left side.'"'
