Sthanu said, "O lord! Everything that I have done is for the sake of the subjects who have been created. O
grandfather! Know that you should not be angry with the ones you have created. O god! In every direction, the subjects are being burnt because of the fierceness of your fire. On seeing this, I feel compassion. O lord of
the universe! Do not be enraged with them."

'"'Prajapati replied, "I am not enraged. Nor is it my desire that these subjects should cease to exist. I desire the
destruction for the sake of making the burden of the earth lighter. The goddess[The earth.] has been afflicted by the burden
and has constantly urged me for the destruction. O Mahadeva! Because of the burden, she seems to be submerging
in the water. Despite using my intelligence to reflect on this, I have not been able to understand what to do. Anger
entered me because I wished to destroy this growth."

'"'Sthanu said, "O lord of the thirty gods! Be pacified about this destruction and do not be enraged. Do not destroy the subjects and the mobile and immobile objects. There are four kinds of categories of beings-all the waterbodies, all the grass and herbs, mobile objects and immobile objects. The entire universe is being robbed of
these and all these created entities are being reduced to ashes. O illustrious one! Show your favours. O virtuous
one! This is the boon that I seek from you. Once they are destroyed, these subjects will never return again. Therefore, let this infinite energy be countered with your own energy. With the welfare of the subjects in mind, think of
some other means. O scorcher of enemies! Let all these living beings be able to return again. It is not desirable that
all the created subjects should be destroyed, together with their offspring. O lord over lords of the worlds! I have
been appointed by you as the one who presides over existence. O protector of the universe! All the mobile and immobile objects in the universe have sprung from you. O great god! With your favours, I desire that these subjects
should return and find subsistence."'

'"Narada said, 'The god who was restrained in speech[Brahma.] heard Sthanu's words. He then restrained the energy
that had originated from within himself. The illustrious one, worshipped by the worlds, restrained the fire. The lord
began to think about creation and destruction. He restrained the fire that had resulted from his anger. At that time,
from within the great-souled creator of the universe, a lady manifested herself. She was dark and dressed in red
garments. Her eyes and palms were red. She was adorned with celestial earrings and wore divine ornaments. Having emerged from within him, she stood on his right. Those two lords of the universe[Brahma and Shiva.] saw that celestial maiden.
O lord of the earth[Meaning Avikampaka.]! The original god of the worlds[Brahma.] addressed the goddess and said, "O Death! Slay the subjects. Using my intelligence and my rage, I have thought of you as the destroyer. Therefore, destroy all the subjects, whether they are dumb or learned. O beautiful one! Without any differentiation, destroy the subjects. You are
thus appointed by me and you will obtain supreme prosperity." The goddess  Death wore  a garland of  lotuses.
Hearing this, the maiden was tormented by grief and began to shed tears. O lord of men! She joined her hands in
salutation and wept. To ensure the welfare of men, she again entreated him.'"'
