'Markandeya said, "O Yudhishthira! O lord of men! At these words of the brahmana, the hunter who knew about
dharma replied to the brahmana. Listen."

'"The hunter said, 'O supreme among brahmanas! The mind first operates in men and leads to perception. Because of this, they serve desire and anger. For that purpose, they undertake great endeavours. They form the habit
of serving the desires of beauty and smell. Then comes attachment and from this follows hatred. Avarice comes
after that, followed by delusion. When they are overcome by avarice and battered by attachment and hatred, dharma is not generated in the intelligence. Instead, there is pretence about following dharma. Dharma is practised in
deceit. One finds pleasure in acquiring artha through deceit. O supreme among brahmanas! One becomes successful in obtaining riches through deceit. The mind finds pleasure in this and evil becomes attractive. O supreme
among brahmanas! Well-wishers and learned ones urge for restraint. But one is ready with replies from the shrutis
and speaks of what is sanctioned by the shrutis. However, because of attachment, three sins of adharma are committed. There is sin in thought, speech and deed. Addicted to adharma, all the good qualities are destroyed. Only
those who are similar in conduct remain friends with such an evil-acting one. As a consequence, unhappiness is
reaped in this world and there is destruction in the next. All evil-souled ones are like this. Now hear about the
gains from dharma. Through one's wisdom, one can foresee the sins. One is skilful in differentiating happiness
from unhappiness and consorts with righteous ones. By practising virtuous deeds, one's intelligence turns to
dharma.'

'"The brahmana said, 'You have truthfully described dharma. There is no one else who can speak about it in this
way. It is my view that you are an extremely great rishi and your power is divine.'

'"The hunter replied, 'The immensely fortunate brahmanas are always rendered offerings first, together with the
ancestors. In this world, with all one's soul, a learned one does that which is pleasing to them. O supreme among
brahmanas! I will tell you what brings pleasure to them. After bowing in obeisance to brahmanas, I will tell you
about the knowledge of brahmanas. Listen to me. O brahmana! This entire universe, everything in this universe
and everything that cannot be vanquished and the great elements have the brahman in the soul. There is nothing
beyond that. The great elements are the sky, the wind, the fire, the water and the earth. Sound, touch, shape, taste
and smell are their properties. These properties have all the sub-properties, related to one another. In due order, all
the properties have a hierarchy consisting of the three qualities. It is said that the sixth property is consciousness,
also called the mind. The seventh is intelligence and pride follows that. There are five senses. There is sattva, rajas
and tamas[The three qualities (guna) are sattva, rajas and tamas.]. These are the seventeen that constitute what is not manifest[The five elements, the five senses and the seven properties.]. The manifest and the unmanifest
are concealed well within the organs of sense. Including the manifest and the unmanifest, there are twenty-four
traits[To the list of seventeen, one adds the five organs of action-organ of generation, organ of excretion, hands,
feet and tongue. This makes it twenty-two and one adds pride (ego) and the soul.]. I have told you everything. What else do you wish to hear?'"'
