'Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! If one desires victory, how should the soldiers be led,
even if one violates dharma a bit? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "Some dharma is based on truth, some more on reason. Some is based on virtuous conduct,
some more on implementation[This is in the context of a battle and the difference between the four types of dharma is unclear. Conceivably,
truth means the dharma of kshatriyas, reason is persuading soldiers to give up their lives, virtuous conduct is encouraging those who are ready to fight and implementation is punishing those who are not ready to fight.]. I will tell you about the different techniques of dharma, so that the objectives of
obtaining dharma and artha become successful. Bandits, who show no respect, stand in the way of everything. For
the sake of countering them, I will tell you what is laid down in the sacred texts. Listen to the different tasks that
can be undertaken, so that one is successful in one's objectives. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You must
know about two kinds of wisdom-the straight and the crooked. Knowing about crooked ways, one should not use
these, except to counter a danger that has arisen, such as when enemies use dissenstion to strike at a king. Knowing
about crooked means, the king can then use these to counter the enemy.

'"Leather from the flanks of elephants, bulls and boa constrictors, stakes, thorns and iron-these are recommended for body armour. Sharp and yellow weapons, red and yellow mail, flags and banners of many dyes and
hues, cutlasses, spears, swords, sharp battleaxes and leather for shields-these must be planned for in abundance.
The weapons must be ready and the warriors must have practised with them. It is recommended that the soldiers
should march in the months of Chaitra and Margashirsha[Respectively, April-May or November-December.]. The crops on the ground ripen then and there is no
lack of water. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that time, it is neither too cold, nor too hot. Therefore, one
should engage then. However, if the enemy is facing a hardship, for the sake of restraining the enemy, the employment of soldiers is recommended then. An advance along an even road that has water and grass is recommended.
Spies who are accomplished in roaming around in the woods must be employed to check these out. Like a herd of
deer, the army should not be made to march through newly cleared ways in the forest. Kings who desire victory
employ all their soldiers in this way. Camps and fortifications that have plenty of water are recommended. These
must be clear and there must be obstacles to an enemy creeping up. A clearing near a forest is thought to be the
best in qualities. People who are skilled in warfare think that it possesses many qualities. Foot soldiers who have
retreated can regroup, there are hiding places, one can strike at the enemy and there are refuges for times of distress. The army should be like a mountain and fight with the constellation saptarshi at the rear[The seven rishis, the constellation of Ursa Major. This means that the army will face southwards.]. O king! Through
this means, one can conquer those who are difficult to defeat. Where there is the wind, where there is the sun,
where there is Shukra[Venus. The sense probably is that these should be to the rear of the army.]-victory is there. O Yudhishthira! The wind is superior to the sun, the sun is superior to
Shukra, but a conjunction is the best[The shloka in the text is brief and states that each is superior to the succeeding one. We have expanded it, so
that the meaning becomes clear.]. People who are skilled in warfare praise an even terrain without mud, water and stones for horses. A clear and level terrain without water is recommended for chariots. A terrain with small
trees, large bushes and water is recommended for those who fight on elephants. Ground with many fortifications,
large trees, clumps of bamboo and cane and hills and woods is recommended for foot soldiers. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! An army with a large number of foot soldiers is solid. When the day is fine, an army with a large
number of chariots is praised. During the monsoon, large numbers of foot soldiers and elephants are praised. One
must engage after considering all these qualities that have been mentioned and the time and the place. If one employs the soldiers well and advances after thinking about this, honouring the tithi and the nakshatra, one always
obtains victory[The tithi is the lunar day and the nakshatras must be auspicious.].

'"Those who are asleep, thirsty and exhausted and those who have been routed must not be struck, nor those
who are striving for moksha[That is, those who have cast aside their weapons and are meditating and fasting to death on the field of battle,
ready to give up their lives.], running away, trembling or drinking and eating. Those who have been severely
wounded, those who have been somewhat wounded, those who have been routed, those who are emaciated, those
who are completely at ease[They are non-combatants.], those who are engaged in some other task, those who have withdrawn, those who
have gone out[Gone outside the camp to collect forage or fodder.], those who have withdrawn, though they may have pledged to return, those who are camp followers, those who follow tradition and guard the gates[They are gatekeepers rather than soldiers.], those who are followers[They are servants rather than soldiers.], those who supervise the gatekeepers and those who are shaking must not be struck.

'"The soldiers who cause a breach[In the ranks of the enemy.] and those who stem a breach[In one's own ranks.] should have the same food and drink as
you and it is a duty to pay them double the wages. For these, it is a duty to make the leaders of ten the leaders of
one hundred. The brave one who is always attentive should be made the leader of one thousand. Having collected
the foremost among them together, one should say, 'Let us take a pledge for the sake of victory in battle. We will
not abandon each other. If there is anyone who is frightened, let him retreat right now. Otherwise, after the tumultuous engagement has begun, they will slay and rout us. If one runs away in the battle, one slays one's own self
and one's own side. If one runs away, there is destruction of wealth, death, ill fame and a bad reputation. A man
who runs away hears harsh and unpleasant words. His lips tremble. His teeth chatter. He throws aside all his
weapons. When the lives of his companions are in danger, he abandons them and runs away. His intelligence
favours the enemy. Let the enemy face such a state. A person who is reluctant to fight is the worst among men.
They can only propagate their own species. But they have nothing in this world, or after death[It is not clear where the pledge ends, but this is as good a place as any.].' The enemy will
be delighted in his mind and welcome one who runs away. O son! He will greet him with honour and auspicious
sounds, as if he is a victorious well-wisher. O king! When the enemy is delighted at your hardship, I think that this
is a more severe sorrow than death. Know that Shri is the foundation for dharma and all happiness. She advances
towards the enemies of cowards, but goes to those who are brave. 'We desire heaven and are ready to give up our
lives in the battle[The pledge begins again.]. Whether we are victorious or whether we are slain, we deserve to obtain the end of virtuous
men.' Having taken this oath and ready to give up their lives, the brave ones are not frightened and immerse themselves in the army of the enemy.

'"One should have men armed with swords and shields at the front. The array of carts should be at the rear and
the wives should be in the middle. For the sake of countering the enemy, the foot soldiers must be hidden. Those
who are at the front must be eager to strike the enemy. Those who are in the front must be reputed, courageous and
spirited. They should advance in the front and other people should follow them. One should make efforts to inspire
those who are cowards. They should be made to stand close, so that the numbers are seen to be larger. As one desires, a few warriors may be made to fight together, or many may be spread out. When a small number fights with
many, the array is called suchimukha[Literally, the mouth of a needle.]. When the engagement has started, he[The king or the leader.] should seize the men by the arms
and shout, regardless of whether it is true or false, 'The enemy has been routed. The army of our friends has arrived. Strike them without any fear.' Men should create a terrible noise and roar and rush after him. They should
slap their arms, create a tumult and sound conch shells, krakachas[Kind of musical instrument.] and horns. Kettledrums, drums, cymbals and
other musical instruments must be sounded and elephants made to trumpet."'
