Vaishampayana said 'Arjuna spoke, like a reviled person who is not ready to forgive. He was firm in his speech
and valour and spoke these proud words. Indra's son was terrible in his valour and revealed his fierce aspect. The
immensely energetic one laughed and repeatedly licked the corners of his mouth. "Alas! What misery! What a
great calamity! This is supreme frailty. Having performed a superhuman deed, you now wish to abandon this
supreme prosperity. The enemies have been slain and the earth has been obtained by practising one's own dharma.
Having killed one's foes, but for foolishness, why should one give everything up? When has a eunuch or one who
procrastinates ever obtained a kingdom? Overcome with rage, why did you kill all the lords of the earth? A person
desiring to live through begging can never use his deeds to enjoy anything. Even if he tries to be powerful, his fortune is destroyed and he is never renowned in the world as someone who possesses sons and animals. O king! If
you resort to this wicked means of subsistence through mendicancy and abandon this prosperous kingdom, what
will people say? O lord! Why do you wish to abandon all enterprise, giving up all your fortune? Like an ordinary
person, why do you wish to roam around as a beggar? You have been born in this lineage of kings and have conquered the entire earth. Yet, because of your confusion, you wish to give up dharma and artha and want to go to the
forest. When you have gone, if wicked people destroy the sacrificial offerings, the consequence of that sin will devolve on you. Nahusha[Yayati's father, an ancestor.] said, 'It is not desirable to possess nothing. Without riches, cruel deeds are perpetrated.
Shame on poverty.' You know that the practice of rishis is not to keep anything for tomorrow. But that which is
known as dharma is established on the basis of riches. When someone's riches are stolen, his dharma is also stolen.
O king! Who amongst us will pardon an act of our riches being robbed? If a poor person stands next to one's own
self, that poor person is abused. Poverty causes degradation in this world and you should not praise it. O king! One
who is degraded sorrows. One who is poor sorrows. I cannot see any difference between one who is degraded and
one who is poor. Here and there, all the rites are extended and accumulated through wealth, like streams flowing
down mountains. O lord of men! Dharma, kama and heaven result from artha. Without artha, the world will not be
able to sustain its life. Like an inferior river[One that dries up during the summer.] during the summer, all the rites of a person with limited intelligence
are destroyed in the absence of wealth. One who possesses riches possesses friends. One who possesses riches possesses relatives. One who possesses riches is a man in this world. One who possesses riches is learned. A person
who doesn't possess riches is incapable of obtaining riches only by desiring it. Riches follow riches, like elephants
follow mighty elephants[There is probably an implicit image of tame elephants being used to ensnare wild ones.]. O lord of men! Dharma, kama, heaven, delight, anger, learning, self-control-all of
these result from artha. The lineage is extended because of artha. Dharma is spread because of riches. O supreme
among men! A person without riches does not possess either this world, or the next. One without riches cannot
perform the acts of dharma. Dharma flows from riches, like mountainous streams from mountains. O king! A person is not called lean when his body is lean. He is lean when he is lean in horses, lean in cattle, lean in servants and
lean in guests. Consider this according to the right principles. Look at the gods and the asuras. O king! The gods
prosper after having slain their own relatives[The gods and the demons are descended from the same father, the sage
Kashyapa.]. If one does not take away the riches of others, how can one observe dharma? The wise ones have determined this in the Vedas. The learned ones have said that one must study
the three kinds of knowledge[The Rig Veda, the Sama Veda and the Yajur Veda.] and always make efforts to accumulate wealth and perform sacrifices. It is through
violence and enmity that all the gods have obtained their stations in heaven. This is what the gods resorted to, and
these are the eternal words of the Vedas. One must study, one must perform austerities, one must perform sacrifices
and one must officiate at the sacrifices of others. But all these become better when one takes objects away from
others. Nowhere do we see any wealth that has not been taken away from others. This is the way in which kings
conquered the earth. Having conquered, they say that the wealth is theirs, just as sons say that the wealth of their
fathers is their own. The rajarshis who have obtained heaven have proclaimed this to be dharma. In the overflowing ocean, water spreads out in the ten directions. In that way, wealth that emanates from a royal lineage spreads
throughout the earth. Earlier, the earth belonged to Dilipa, Nriga, Nahusha, Ambarisha and Mandhata[Dilipa was a famous king from the solar dynasty and was the father of
Raghu. Nriga was the son of Ikshvaku and also belonged to the solar dynasty. Nahusha was the father of Yayati and belonged to the lunar dynasty. Ambarisha was from the solar dynasty and so was Mandhata.]. It belongs
to you now. O king! A prosperous sacrifice, with all the donations given, now awaits you. If you do not perform
that sacrifice, you will cause offence to the gods. If a king performs a horse sacrifice and offers donations, everyone becomes purified because of that. Vishvarupa[Shiva's name.] Mahadeva performed a great sacrifice at which everything was
offered. He offered all the beings as oblations and then offered himself. That is the eternal path of prosperity and
we have heard that there is no other end that is possible. This is the great path known as dasharatha[Dasaratha means ten chariots. It is possible that this originally read
dasharatra, meaning a sacrifice that lasted for ten nights.]. O king! Do
not follow any other route."'
