'Astika said, "O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! Soma's sacrifice, Varuna's sacrifice and Prajapati's
sacrifice were held in Prayaga in ancient times. But your sacrifice is in no way inferior to theirs. Blessed be those
who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! Shakra[Indra.] performed one hundred sacrifices.
But your sacrifice is equal to one hundred of his. Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best
of the Bharata lineage! This sacrifice of yours is like the sacrifices of Yama, Harimedha and King Rantideva.
Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! This sacrifice of yours is
like the sacrifices of Gaya, King Shashabindu and King Vaishravana. Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son
of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! This sacrifice of yours is like the sacrifices of Nriga, Ajamida and
Dasharatha's son[Rama.]. Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! This
sacrifice of yours is like the sacrifice of King Yudhishthira, who was the son of a god and a descendant of Ajamida
and was famous even in heaven. Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata
lineage! This sacrifice of yours is like the sacrifice of Satyavati's son, Krishna Dvaipayana[Vyasa.], in which he himself
was the priest. Blessed are those who are dear to us. Those who are seated here are as radiant as the sun and the
fire and make it equal to the sacrifice of Vritra's slayer[Indra.]. There is nothing that they do not know. The gifts given
to them are inexhaustible. I am certain that there is no ritvija in all the worlds who is the equal of your ritvija Dvaipayana. His disciples travel the earth, having become ritvijas skilled in their duties. The great-souled god Vibhavasu[The fire. Vibhavasu is also a name for the sun.] Chitrabhanu[The fire. Chitrabhanu is also a name for the sun.], whose seed is golden, who trails black smoke, who consumes everything and whose head
faces the south, is eager for your offerings. In the world of the living, there is no king equal to you in protecting his
subjects. My mind is pleased at your perseverance. You are Varuna or Dharmaraja Yama. Like the wielder of the
vajra, Shakra[Indra.] himself, you are the protector of all subjects in this world. In my view, in this world, you are the
lord of all men. There is no king equal to you in sacrifices. You are like Khatvanga, Nabhaga and Dilipa. You are
like Yayati and Mandhata in your power. You are like the sun in your splendour. In the rigidity of your vows, you
shine like Bhishma. You are like Valmiki, whose firmness is subtle. You are like Vasishtha in controlling your
anger. In my view, your sovereignty is like that of Indra and your radiance is like that of Narayana. You are like
Yama in administering dharma. Like Krishna, you have all the qualities. Like the vasus, you are the abode of the
goddess of wealth. You are the source of all sacrifices. You are like Dambhodbhava in strength. Learned in the use
of arms, you are like Rama[Parashurama.]. In your energy, you are like Ourva and Trita. Like Bhagiratha, your sight inspires
terror."'

Souti said, 'Thus addressed, they were all pleased-the king, the sadasyas, the ritvijas and the fire into which
offerings are given. On seeing the expressions they manifested, King Janamejaya spoke.'
