'Brihadashva said, "Rituparna, for whom truth was his strength, arrived in Vidarbha in the evening. The people informed King Bhima about his arrival. On Bhima's words, the king entered the city of Kundina[The capital of Vidarbha.], filling all the
ten directions with the sound of his chariot. Nala's horses[The ones that were in Vidarbha, not the ones Nala was driving.] heard the roar of the chariot and hearing this, rejoiced, just as they had in Nala's company earlier. Damayanti also heard the roar of Nala's chariot, which was like
the deep rumbling of clouds at the onset of the monsoon. Like the horses, Bhima's daughter thought that the chariot roared as it used to before, when Nala used to control his horses. The peacocks in the palace, the elephants in the
stables and the horses heard the roar of the great king's chariot. O king! On hearing the roar of the chariot, the peacocks and the elephants made expectant noises, because they thought the rains were imminent.

'"Damayanti said, 'The roar of the chariot fills up the entire earth and gladdens my heart. It must be King Nala.
Today, if I do not see the valorous Nala, whose face is like the moon and who possesses innumerable qualities,
there is no doubt that I will perish. If I am not engulfed today in the arms of that brave one, whose touch brings
pleasure, there is no doubt that I will perish. If Nishadha does not come to me today, with a voice like the roar of
the clouds and with a complexion of gold, there is no doubt that I will perish. If that Indra among kings, whose valour is like a lion and who can restrain a mad elephant, does not come to me, there is no doubt that I will perish. I
do not remember the slightest falsehood. I do not remember the slightest injury in him. The great-souled keeps all
his promises, made even in jest. My lord is forgiving, brave, gentle and generous and is in control of his senses. He
is not addicted to low vices. Nishadha has always behaved towards me like an impotent one[It is not clear what this means. Perhaps it means that Nala has never made excessive demands on Damayanti. Perhaps it means that Nala has behaved like an impotent person towards other women.]. Remembering his
qualities, I am tormented day and night. My heart is about to be rent asunder because of the sorrow of being separated from that beloved one.'"

'Brihadashva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Lamenting in this way and desiring to see Punyashloka, she ascended that large palace, as if bereft of her senses. She saw the chariot in the centre[Of the palace.], with King Rituparna, Varshneya and Bahuka on it. Then Varshneya and Bahuka dismounted from the supreme chariot. They unharnessed the horses and secured the chariot. O great king! King Rituparna alighted from the chariot and presented
himself before Bhima, whose valour was terrible. Then Bhima welcomed him with the best of honours. He had
suddenly come. The counsel of the women was not known[Was not known to Bhima. So Bhima wondered why Rituparna had suddenly come.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! 'You are welcome. What can I do?' asked the king. He did not know that the king had come for the sake of his daughter. The
wise King Rituparna, whose truth was his valour, saw that there was no other king or prince there. There were no
signs of a svayamvara, nor had an assembling of brahmanas occurred. Then the king, the lord of Koshala, thought
about this in his mind and said, 'I have come here to pay my respects.' King Bhima began to reflect about this in
his mind. There had to be some other reason for travelling more than a hundred yojanas, passing through many villages. The reason for his arrival had not been correctly stated. The minor reason identified could not have been the
reason for his arrival. But the king showed him all due respect and repeatedly told him that he was tired and should
rest. Thus treated with friendly homage, the king was pleased. He happily followed the king's servants and went to
the house that had been identified for him. O king! When King Rituparna had left with Varshneya, Bahuka grasped
the chariot and went to the place where chariots were kept. He freed the horses and tended to them, as instructed in
the sacred texts. Having comforted the horses himself, he sat down on a side of the chariot.

'"The sorrowful Damayanti had seen King Bhangasvari, Varshneya the son of a suta and Bahuka, in that position. Vidarbha's daughter began to think. Whose chariot roared in that way? The great sound was like Nala's, but
Nishadha was not to be seen. Was it possible that Varshneya had acquired the knowledge? Was that the reason why
the roar of the chariot made a great sound like that of Nala's? Or was it the case that Rituparna was the equal of
King Nala? The roar of the chariot seemed to be like that of Nishadha's. O lord of the earth! Damayanti debated in
this way. O king! She then sent a lady messenger in search of Nishadha."'
