'Duryodhana said, "O Kshatta! You always take pride in praising the fame of our enemies and secretly deprecate
Dhritarashtra's sons. O Vidura! We know whom you are friends to. You always look down upon us, as if we are
children. The man whose love is elsewhere is clearly revealed, from the way he distributes censure and praise.
Your tongue reveals your heart and mind and that your mind is antagonistic. We embraced you like a serpent. Like
a cat you injure the one by whom you are sustained. It is said there is no sin worse than killing one's protector. O
Kshatta! How is it that you don't fear sin? Having vanquished our enemies, we have obtained great fruits. O
Kshatta! Do not use harsh words against us. You always praise friendship with those who hate us and that is the
reason you harbour hatred towards us. A man becomes an enemy by uttering unpardonable words. He secretly
hides the praise for the enemies. How does shame not stop you? You are now speaking whatever you desire[The sense is that Vidura's secret inclinations now stand revealed.].
We know your mind, and do not disregard us. Learn from proximity with those who are wise and old. O Vidura!
Protect the fame you have earned so far. Do not concern yourself with the affairs of others. O Vidura! Do not deprecate us by mentioning your deeds. Do not always use such harsh words against us. O Vidura! I never ask you
what you think. O Kshatta! Desist, because our patience is wearing down. There is one controller[The creator.] and there is
no second controller. That controller controls when a man is asleep in the womb. Through his control, like water
flowing downwards, I flow in the direction appointed by him. He who uses his head to break a stone and he who
feeds a serpent, are controlled in those deeds by his[The creator.] instructions. He who wishes to control another by force
only finds an enemy. A learned one looks up to those who act in friendship. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If
one lights a blazing fire and does not escape from it, even the remnants of ashes will not be found anywhere. O
Kshatta! One should not give shelter to someone who hates and is from the enemy's party, especially if that man
bears ill will. O Vidura! Therefore, go wherever you wish. However well treated, an unchaste wife will always
leave."

'Vidura replied, "O king[Vidura is now speaking to Duryodhana.]! He who gives to a man in this fashion, for him all friendship comes to an end. The
minds of kings are always unsteady. After granting protection, they slay with clubs. O son of a king! You do not
think yourself to be a child. O evil-minded one! You consider me to be a child. One, who has first accepted a man
as a well-wisher and then reviles him, is the one who is a child. One with an evil mind never does that which
brings welfare, like a corrupt woman in the house of a learned brahmana. That which is certain does not please this
bull among the Bharatas, like a sixty-year-old husband to a young woman. O king! If you only wish to hear words
that please you in all deeds, regardless of good or bad, ask the women, the dull and the crippled. Go ask those who
are likewise stupid. O descendant of the Pratipa lineage! It is certainly easy to find a man who says things that
please you. It is rare to find those who render unpleasant and right advice. He who sticks to the path of dharma and
offers advice to his lord, regardless of whether it is pleasant or unpleasant, however unpleasant, is a true aide to the
king. O great king! Drink that which is healthy, bitter, pungent, hot, harsh, foul-smelling and revolting. This is
what the good always drink and the evil refuse. Drink it and regain your calm. I always wish fame and prosperity
to Vichitravirya's sons and their sons. Wherever you may be, I pay you my respects. May the brahmanas utter
benedictions over me. O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.]! I will carefully tell you this. Learned ones should
never anger serpents that have venom in their eyes[Referring to the Pandavas.]."'