Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! This deed performed by Bhima was extremely difficult to accomplish. He brought
down the mighty-armed Karna from the seat of his chariot. There is only one person who can kill the Srinjayas and
the Pandavas in the battle and that is Karna. O suta! That is what Duryodhana has repeatedly told me. On seeing
that Radheya had been defeated by Bhima in the battle, what did my son, Duryodhana, do next?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! On seeing that Radheya, the son of the suta, was beaten back in that great battle,
he[Duryodhana.] addressed the large army of his brothers. 'O fortunate ones! Swiftly go and protect Radheya. He confronts a
hardship and has been submerged in the fathomless ocean that is Bhimasena.' Having been thus instructed by the
king, they wished to kill Bhimasena and attacked him in great anger, like insects heading towards a flame. Shrutayudha, Durdhara, Kratha, Vivitsu, Vikata, Soma, Nishangi, Kavachi, Pashi, Nanda, Upanandaka, Dushpradharsha, Subahu, Vatavega, Suvarchasa, Dhanurgraha, Durmada, Satva and Soma[The names of Duryodhana's brothers. Not only is there an inconsistency about which of Duryodhana's minor brothers was killed when, there is
also inconsistency about the names of Duryodhana's minor brothers.] -these were valiant and extremely powerful. They attacked Bhimasena with chariots and surrounded him from every direction. They released
a storm of arrows, of many different forms, from every direction. O lord of men! Your sons quickly descended on
the immensely strong Bhimasena and attacked him. He killed five hundred rathas and fifty other rathas who advanced against him. He angrily severed Vivitsu's head with a broad-headed arrow. It had earrings and a helmet and
was like the full moon. O great king! Severed by Bhima, it fell down on the ground. O lord! On seeing that their
brave brother had been killed, in that battle, all of them attacked Bhima, who was terrible in his valour, from all
directions. In that great battle, Bhima, terrible in his valour, used other broad-headed arrows to rob the lives of two
more of your sons in the encounter. O king! They fell down on the ground, like trees that had been uprooted by a
tempest. They were Vikata and Soma, who were like ones born from the wombs of the gods. Swiftly, Bhima used
an extremely sharp iron arrow to convey Kratha to Yama's eternal abode. Slain, he fell down on the ground. O lord
of men! Fierce sounds of lamentation arose there. O king! Your archer sons were being slain there. Agitating your
soldiers in the battle, the immensely strong Bhimasena conveyed Nanda and Upananda[Identical with Upanandaka.] to Yama's abode. Your
sons were terrified and lost their senses. On seeing Bhimsena in that battle, like Yama the Destroyer, they fled.

' "On seeing that your sons had been killed, the great-minded son of the suta again went to the spot where Pan-
dava was, on horses that possessed the complexion of swans. O great king! The king of Madra swiftly drove those
horses towards Bhimasena's chariot and powerfully engaged with him. O lord of men! O great king! The clash that
ensued between Karna and Pandava was fierce. It was tumultuous and terrible in form. O great king! On seeing
those two maharathas clash against each other, my mind was certainly anxious to know what would transpire today. O Indra among kings! However, Karna laughed and didn't have to make a great effort. In a short instant, he
deprived Bhima, whose deeds were terrible, of his chariot. O best of the Bharatas! Despite being deprived of his
chariot, the one who was like the wind god, laughed. The mighty-armed one descended from his supreme chariot,
with a club in his hand. O king! Bhima, the striker and scorcher of enemies, assumed a terrible form and violently
killed seven hundred elephants. He knew about the inner organs and struck them at the base of their tusks, their
eyes, their temples and their loins. Having severely struck them in their inner organs and killed them, he roared.
They fled in fear, but were again rallied back by the riders. They surrounded him, like clouds around the sun. However, using his club, he killed and brought down seven hundred elephants on the ground, with their riders, weapons
and flags, like a mass of clouds driven away by the wind. There were extremely strong elephants that belonged to
Subala's son[Shakuni.]. In the battle, Kounteya again brought down five hundred and two of these. He fiercely crushed
one hundred chariots and a hundred foot soldiers that belonged to the enemy. They were killed by Pandava in the
battle, while your army looked on. They were scorched by the sun and by the great-souled Bhima. Your soldiers
began to shrink, like a strip of leather held above a fire. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those on your side
were terrified because of their fear of Bhima. In that encounter, they were driven away by Bhima in the ten directions. There were five hundred other rathas. With shields and armour, they cheerfully and swiftly attacked Bhima,
showering him with arrows from every direction. With his club, Bhima brought down all those rathas and charioteers, with their flags, standards and weapons, like Vishnu against the asuras. On Shakuni's instructions, three
thousand riders who prided themselves on their bravery, advanced against Bhima, with lances, swords and spears
in their hands. He was the destroyer of enemy heroes and spiritedly counter-attacked those horse riders. He roamed
around in diverse motions and killed and brought them down. When they were thus oppressed by him, a great and
tumultuous sound arose in every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It was as if a clump of reeds was
being severed with a sword. Having slain three thousand supreme horses that belonged to Subala's son, he ascended a chariot and angrily attacked Radheya.

' "O king! In that battle, Karna enveloped Dharma's son, the scorcher of enemies, with arrows and brought
down his charioteer. On seeing that he[Yudhishthira.] was fleeing from the encounter on his chariot, the maharatha pursued
him and released swift arrows that were shafted with the feathers of herons. When the fleeing king was thus enveloped with arrows, the son of the wind god angrily covered heaven and earth with his net of arrows. Radheya,
the destroyer of enemies, swiftly repulsed him. In every direction, he enveloped Bhima with sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Karna was in front of Bhimasena's chariot. Satyaki, whose soul was immeasurable, placed himself at the side and attacked Karna, severely afflicting him with arrows. Those two bulls among
archers[Karna and Satyaki.] clashed against each other and spiritedly released colourful and dazzling arrows. O Indra among kings!
Those terrible nets of arrows released by them could be seen to fiercely stretch out in the sky, like the red backs of
cranes. Because of the thousands of arrows released by them, we could not see the radiance of the sun, the sky, the
directions, or the sub-directions. O king! It was midday and the great radiance of the sun was scorching. But all
that seemed to be dispelled by the storm of arrows that Karna and Madhava[Satyaki.] shot.

' "On seeing that Soubala, Kritavarma, Drona's son, Adhiratha's son and Kripa were engaged with the Pandavas, the Kurus returned again. O lord of the earth! When they descended, a fierce sound arose. It was like the terrible sound made by oceans during the rainy season. On beholding each other in that great battle, both armies were
anxious. But they were also extremely delighted at having engaged with each other. When the sun attained its midpoint, the battle commenced. Nothing like this has been seen earlier, nor heard of. A large army violently clashed
against another large army in that battle. It was as if a large store of water was heading powerfully towards the
ocean. There was an extremely loud roar as those two armies clashed against each other. It was as if the waters in
the ocean were roaring loudly. Thus, those two armies powerfully clashed against each other. They became one,
like two rivers meeting each other. O lord of the earth! A battle that was fierce in form commenced. The Kurus and
the Pandavas engaged, desiring extremely great fame. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Kurus
roared out loudly to each other there and many different kinds of noises were heard. In that encounter, the warriors
were heard to revile the fathers, the mothers, the deeds and the conduct of their adversaries. In the battle, they were
seen to censure each other. O king! I formed the view that their lifespans had run out. On seeing the angry forms of
those immensely energetic ones, I was overcome by a great fear about what would transpire. O king! The Pandava
and Kourava maharathas began to wound and kill each other with sharp arrows." '
