Sanjaya said, "O venerable one! Kritavarma, Kripa, Drona's son, the son of the suta, Uluka, Soubala and the
king[Duryodhana.] and his brothers saw that the army was afflicted because of the fear of Pandu's son. It was submerged with
great force, like a shattered boat in an ocean. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, in a short while, a
battle commenced. It generated fear among cowards and increased the delight of brave ones. In the battle, Kripa
released showers of arrows that moved like locusts and shrouded the Srinjayas. Shikandi was angry and quickly
advanced against Goutama[Kripa.]. From every direction, he showered down a large number of arrows on the best of
brahmanas. Kripa was knowledgeable about great weapons and destroyed that shower of arrows. In the encounter,
he angrily pierced Shikhandi with ten arrows. Shikhandi became enraged in that battle. He severely pierced Kripa
with swift arrows that were shafted with the feathers of herons. Having been severely pierced, maharatha Kripa,
supreme among brahmanas, deprived Parshata[Shikhandi.] of his horses, charioteer and chariot. With his horses slain, the
maharatha[Shikhandi.] descended from his chariot and grasping a sword and a shield, quickly advanced against the brahmana. On seeing him violently attack in the battle, he enveloped him with straight-tufted arrows and it was wonderful. What we witnessed was extraordinary, as if there was a torrent of rocks. O king! Shikhandi remained immobile in that encounter. O supreme among kings! On seeing that Shikhandi had been shrouded by Kripa, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna quickly counter-attacked Kripa. On seeing that Dhrishtadyumna was advancing towards
Sharadvata's chariot, maharatha Kritavarma powerfully repulsed him. On seeing that Yudhishthira was advancing
towards Sharadvata's chariot, together with his sons and soldiers, Drona's son countered him. Your son received
the spirited maharathas Nakula and Sahadeva and countered them with showers of arrows. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! In that battle, Karna Vaikartana countered Bhimasena, the Karushas, the Kekayas and the Srinjayas. O venerable one! Meanwhile, in the encounter, Sharadvata Kripa swiftly dispatched arrows towards
Shikhandi, as if wishing to burn him down. However, with his sword, he[Shikhandi.] repeatedly sliced down all the arrows
that were embellished with gold and were shot at him from all directions, while they were still in mid-air. At this,
Goutama quickly shattered Parshata's shield, which was decorated with the marks of one hundred moons, with his
arrows. The men roared loudly. O great king! Deprived of his shield, he attacked with the sword in his hand. But
he had come under Kripa's control, like a diseased person in the mouth of death. The immensely strong one was
afflicted by Sharadvata's fierce arrows. On seeing this, Suketu[Suketu was a prince of Panchala.], Chitraketu's son, spiritedly advanced. In the
battle, he showered the brahmana with many sharp arrows. The one whose soul was immeasurable, dashed towards
Goutama's chariot. O supreme among kings! On seeing that the brahmana, devoted to his vows, was engaged in a
fight with someone else, Shikhandi quickly withdrew. O king! Suketu struck Goutama with nine arrows, pierced
him again with seventy, and struck him yet again with three arrows. O venerable one! He next severed his[Kripa's.] bow,
with an arrow affixed to it. With another arrow, he severely struck his charioteer in the inner organs. Goutama became angry at this and picked up another new bow that was firm. He struck Suketu in all his inner organs with thirty arrows. All his limbs were weakened and he wavered on that supreme chariot. He was like a tree, trembling and
moving during an earthquake. His head was adorned with flaming earrings. It had a headdress and a helmet. While
he was moving, he[Kripa.] brought it down with a kshurapra arrow. That head fell down on the ground, like a piece of
meat being carried by a hawk. Thereafter, the head was dislodged and fell down on the ground. O great king!
When he was slain, those who followed him were frightened. They abandoned the fight with Goutama and fled in
the ten directions.

' "Kritavarma repeatedly asked Parshata to wait[This Parshata is Dhrishtadyumna. All of Drupada's sons can be called
Parshata.]. In the battle, there was a tumultuous encounter between
those from the Vrishni and Parshata lineages[Kritavarma was from the Vrishni lineage.]. O king! It was like a fight between a hawk and a vulture over a
piece of meat. In the battle, Dhrishtadyumna angrily struck Hardikya, Hridika's son, in the chest with nine arrows
and afflicted him. In the encounter, Kritavarma was firmly struck by Parshata. In turn, he shrouded Parshata, his
chariot and his horses, with arrows. O king! With his chariot enveloped by arrows, Dhrishtadyumna could no
longer be seen. It was like the sun enveloped by clouds at the onset of the rains. Those large numbers of arrows
were decorated with gold. O king! But having repulsed them with his arrows, though he was covered with wounds,
Dhrishtadyumna looked resplendent in the battle. Parshata, the leader of an army, became angry and unleashed an
extremely terrible shower of arrows towards Kritavarma. On seeing that violent and incessant shower of arrows
descend in the encounter, Hardikya destroyed them with thousands of arrows. On seeing that the extremely irresistible shower of arrows had been countered in the battle by Kritavarma, Parshata advanced and repulsed him. He
used a broad-headed arrow, sharp at the edges, to swiftly dispatch his charioteer to Yama's abode. Slain, he fell
down from the chariot. Dhrishtadyumna vanquished his powerful maharatha enemy. In the battle, he then quickly
countered the Kouravas with arrows. At this, the warriors on your side attacked Dhrishtadyumna. They roared like
lions and a battle commenced." '
