'Narada said, "Having been thus made to ascend to heaven by those kings who were extremely generous in the
gifts they gave, Yayati took leave of his grandsons and was established in heaven. There was a shower of fragrant
flowers. There was an auspicious breeze with a holy scent. Amidst this, he attained that eternal station because of
the fruits earned by his grandsons. This was enhanced with his own deeds and he was resplendent with supreme
prosperity. He was happily received in heaven by masses of gandharvas and apsaras, with singing and dancing.
There was the sound of drums being beaten. He was applauded by many gods, rajarshis and bards. He was offered
excellent hospitality and was honoured by the gods. He obtained the fruits of heaven. The grandfather[Brahma.] spoke to
the happy and serene king, as if satisfying him with these words. 'Through your deeds in the world, you have entirely accumulated the four parts of dharma. This eternal world is yours. You will again have eternal fame in heaven because of your good deeds. O rajarshi! Darkness had clouded the intelligence of all those who dwell in heaven.
They did not recognize you because of this. Because you were not known, you fell down. You have returned here
again after your grandsons affectionately saved you. You have regained the station you had won through your
deeds. This is immoveable, eternal, sacred, supreme, permanent and without decay.' Yayati replied, 'O illustrious
one! I have a doubt. Please dispel it. O grandfather of the world! It is not proper that I should ask anyone else. I
protected and extended my subjects for thousands of years. I performed many sacrifices and gave a flood of gifts
and obtained great fruits. How could they be exhausted in such a short span of time? Why did I fall down? O illustrious one! You know that I had obtained eternal worlds.' The grandfather replied, 'You have protected and extended your subjects for thousands of years. You have perfomed many sacrifices and given a flood of gifts. You obtained fruits. But all of those were destroyed through a single taint and you were thrown down. O Indra among
kings! The residents of heaven censured you because of your insolence. O rajarshi! If there is vanity, strength, violence, wickedness and deceit, this world cannot become eternal. O king! You should not disrespect those who are
superior, inferior, or in the middle. No one can be an equal to those who are consumed by vanity. There is no doubt
that men who recount the story of your fall and subsequent ascendance will be freed from all calamities.' O lord of
the earth! In ancient times, Yayati was diminished by this taint of insolence and Galava because of his excessive
obstinacy. Those who desire their own welfare should listen to the advice of well-wishers who wish them well.
One should not be stubborn. Obstinacy gives rise to destruction. O Gandhari's son! Therefore, give up insolence
and anger. O brave one! Make peace with the Pandavas. O king! Abandon your wrath. O king! Whatever is given,
whatever is done, whatever austerities are observed, whatever sacrifices are performed-these are never destroyed.
They do not diminish. No one other than the doer enjoys these. This great and supreme account is revered by those
who are extremely learned and are without hatred. In this world, those who examine it and study it in great detail,
learn about the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.] and conquer the earth."'
