'Duryodhana said, "The arya kings are devoted to truth and great in their vows, complete in their knowledge, eloquent and immersed in vedanta[Vedanta is the end (anta) of the Vedas and usually refers to the Upanishads. The term is also used for the six
schools of philosophy that followed.], forbearing, modest, famous and with dharma in their hearts. Those kings who
have been anointed wait on him[Yudhishthira.]. There I saw many thousands of wild cows that had been brought by the kings
as dakshina, with brass pots for milking. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As a mark of respect and of their
own volition, the kings brought supreme vessels for the consecration there. Bahlika brought the chariot that was
inlaid with gold. Sudakshina[The king of Kamboja.] yoked it with white horses from Kamboja. In affection, the immensely strong
Sunitha[Shishupala.] fixed the axle. Willingly, the king of Chedi[Shishupala again.] himself fixed the flagstaff. The king from the south had
the armour ready, Magadha[Since Jarasandha had already been killed, this is Sahadeva.] the garland and the headdress. The great archer Vasudana[The king of Pamshu.] held the king of elephants, sixty years old. Matsya[Virata.] fixed the sides[Of the chariot.], Ekalavya held the footwear. Avanti had the many kinds of water required for the final bath. Chekitana[From the Vrishni lineage.] gave the quiver, the king of Kashi the bow and Shalya the sword with a
golden hilt and with straps inlaid with gold. Dhoumya and the immensely ascetic Vyasa performed the anointing,
after having placed Narada and the sages Devala-Asita[Alternatively, Asita-Devala. These are two ancient sages, Asita and Devala, who are always referred to
together.] at the forefront. The maharshis attended the abhisheka[The actual act of coronation or anointing by sprinkling sacred water.]
with pleasure. Just as the saptarshis approach the great Indra, lord of the gods, in heaven, with Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.],
the great-souled ones, learned in the Vedas and the mantras, came with large quantities of gifts.

'"Satyaki, with truth as his valour, held up the umbrella. Dhananjaya and Bhima fanned Pandava[Yudhisthira.]. Varuna's
conch shell had been constructed by Vishvakarma in ancient times with a thousand pieces of gold and had been
given by Prajapati to Indra in that ancient era. The ocean now brought it for him[Yudhishthira.] and Krishna anointed him with
that. At this, I felt benumbed. They went to the western, eastern and southern oceans[This is a reference to the conquest of the Pandavas.]. O father! But they did not
go to the north, which is for the birds. To make it auspicious, hundreds of conch shells were blown and when they
were blown together, my hair stood up at the roar. Kings were deprived of their own energy and fell prostrate on
the ground. But Dhristadyumna, the Pandavas, Satyaki and Krishna as the eighth were valorous and kindly disposed towards each other[These eight didn't become unconscious.]. They maintained themselves and on seeing me and the kings unconscious on the
ground, laughed at us. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then, delightedly, Bibhatsu gave the principal brahmanas five hundred bullocks, their horns plated with gold. Like lord Harishchandra, Kounteya accomplished the
rajasuya and his prosperity was supreme. Shambara's slayer[Pradyumna killed a demon named Shambara. Pradyumna was the son of Krishna and Rukmini. However,
there is no account of this Pradyumna having undertaken any great sacrifices. But Pradyumna is also a name for
Kama, or the god of love, and he is also known as the killer of Shambara. The reference could therefore be to
Kama.], Youvanashva, Manu, King Prithu and Bhagiratha
couldn't rival this. O lord! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having witnessed Partha's prosperity like that of
Harishchandra, how should I see any good in remaining alive? O lord of men! A yoke attached by a blind man becomes loose. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The younger ones[The Pandavas.] are prospering, while the older ones[The Kouravas.]
are decaying. O supreme among the Kurus! Having witnessed all this, I find no refuge, whichever way I look. That
is the reason I am becoming thin. That is the reason I am pale and miserable."'
