'Yudhishthira asked, "In this world, there is no one as knowledgeable as you in the Vedas and the Vedangas[The six Vedangas are shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda (prosody), vyakarana (grammar),
nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy) and kalpa (rituals).]. Tell
me. Which are the deeds through which one attains the supreme objective?"

'The serpent replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is my view that one goes to heaven by giving to
those who are worthy, speaking the truth and by always resorting to non-violence."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O serpent! Between generosity and truthfulness, which is seen to be superior? Between
non-violence and good conduct, which is superior and which is inferior?"

'The serpent replied, "The superiority or inferiority of generosity versus truthfulness or non-violence vis-à-vis
good conduct is determined by whether the effects of these deeds are more or less important. There are times when
truthfulness is regarded as superior to generosity. O Indra among kings! There are times when generosity is regarded as superior to truthfulness. O mighty archer! O lord of the earth! In that way, there are occasions when non-violence is superior to kind words and other occasions when kind words are superior. O king! In this fashion, the superiority depends on the effects. If there is anything else that you are thinking of, tell me. I will explain."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O serpent! What are the deeds through which one can attain heaven? What are seen to be
the certain fruits of the disembodied soul? Explain these things to me."

'The serpent replied, "O king! Depending on one's own deeds, there are seen to be three end goals-human
birth, residence in heaven and rebirth as inferior species. These are the three ends. Through continuous acts of
charity and deeds based on reasons of non-violence, one attains heaven from this world of men. O Indra among
kings! Through the reverse deeds, a man is born as inferior species. O son[The word used is tata, applied affectionately to anyone younger or junior.]! I will tell you about the specifics. A
man who is addicted to desire and anger, and overcome by violence and avarice, is dislodged and is reborn as inferior species. It has separately been said that one who is born as inferior species, can be reborn as a human. Thus,
cattle and horses are seen to have attained divine status. O son! Such is the goal of all animals, depending on one's
deeds. O king! The self should always be established in greatness. From one birth to another, the soul enjoys the
fruits that come from a body, though it is distinct. This is the characteristic of all beings."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O serpent! Tell me exactly how the soul is established in a body and experiences sound,
touch, colour, taste and smell. O immensely intelligent one! Do you also not separately experience these senses? O
supreme among serpents! Tell me everything that I have asked."

'The serpent replied, "O one with a long life! When the soul has resorted to a physical body and has established
itself in control, it experiences each of those senses, depending on their characteristics. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Learn from me that knowledge, intelligence and the mind are faculties that determine a soul's enjoyment
of the senses. O son! Through the mind, the embodied being experiences one after another, from one object to another, the senses that flow out of each of these objects. O tiger among men! The mind is thus the cause of all perceptions among animals. At the same time, it cannot experience multiple objects. O tiger among men! The soul is
established between the eyebrows. It creates the intelligence about different kinds of objects. O tiger among kings!
According to the wise, different kinds of experience flow from this intelligence. These are the ways of an embodied soul."

'Yudhishthira asked, "Tell me. What are the specific characteristics that distinguish the mind and the intelligence? What is said to be the supreme deed for those who wish to know about the soul?"

'The serpent replied, "O son! Through various distractions, the intelligence is said to follow the soul. Though
consciousness is derived from it[The soul.], it is said to control the soul. Intelligence is not subject to the different qualities.
But the mind has these qualities. O son! Thus have I distinguished between the mind and intelligence. But you
yourself have knowledge about these matters. What do you think?"

'Yudhishthira said, "O best among those who are endowed with intelligence! Your intelligence is supreme. You
know everything that there is to know. Why are you then asking me this question? You are omniscient. You dwelt
in heaven. You were the performer of extraordinary deeds. I am confronted with great uncertainty. How did delusion overcome you?"

'The serpent replied, "Even an extremely strong and brave man is deluded by prosperity. It is my view that all
those who are immersed in happiness become confused in intelligence. O Yudhishthira! I became deluded because
of my prosperity. I was intoxicated. Though enlightened, I descended into this state and am enlightening you now.
O great king! O scorcher of enemies! You have performed a service towards me. Because of my conversation with
a virtuous one[Yudhishthira.], I have been freed from the grievous curse. In earlier times, I used to roam around heaven in a celestial chariot. Intoxicated with my vanity, I thought of nothing else. Brahmarshis, gods, gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas, serpents, kinnaras and all the residents of the three worlds had to pay me taxes. O lord of the earth! Such
was the power of my glance, that whatever being my eyes happened to behold, the strength of my sight robbed him
of his energy. Thousands of brahmarshis bore my palanquin. O king! This misconduct brought about my dislodging from prosperity. One day, when the sage Agastya was bearing me, my feet happened to touch him. In anger,
destiny[Agastya, in the form of destiny.] then spoke these words, 'May you be destroyed. Become a serpent.' At that, I fell down from that
supreme vimana. I lost all my ornaments. While I was falling down, with my face downwards, I saw that I had become a predatory serpent[The word used is vyala, which means both predator and serpent.]. Then I asked that brahmana, 'Please free me from this curse. O illustrious one! I have
transgressed out of my folly. Please pardon me.' As I was falling, he was overcome by compassion and told me, 'O
lord of men! Dharmaraja Yudhishthira will free you from this curse, once the fruits of your insolence and terrible
strength have decayed. O great king! You will then attain supreme fruits.' On witnessing the strength of his austerities, great wonder was born in me. That is the reason I asked you about the brahman and brahmanas. O king!
Truthfulness, self-control, austerities, non-violence and constant benevolence are the means whereby men attain
salvation, not through birth or lineage. Your immensely strong brother, Bhimasena, is safe and unhurt. O great
king! May you be fortunate. I will return to heaven."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, King Nahusha discarded the body of a boa. Assuming a celestial form,
he returned to the world of the thirty gods. The fortunate, Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, returned to the
hermitage with his brother Bhima, accompanied by Dhoumya. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira told the assembled brahmanas the details of everything that had happened. O king! On hearing this, the brahmanas, the other three brothers
and the famous Droupadi were astounded. All the best of the brahmanas desired the welfare of the Pandavas. Censuring Bhima's rashness, they told him not to act in this way. The Pandavas were extremely delighted at seeing the
immensely strong Bhima freed from fear. They happily enjoyed themselves.'
