'Sanjaya said, "O king! On seeing that Satvata, invincible in battle, was descending, Bhurishrava became angry
and suddenly attacked him. The mighty-armed Kouravya spoke to the bull among the Shini lineage. 'It is good fortune that you have arrived within my range of vision today. In this battle today, I will obtain what I have always
desired. Unless you abandon the battle, you will not escape with your life. You have always been proud of your
bravery and I will kill you in today's encounter. O Dasharha! I will delight Suyodhana, the king of the Kurus. You
will be scorched by my arrows and fall down on the face of the earth today. All the brave ones in the battle will
witness this, together with Keshava and Arjuna. Today, the king who is Dharma's son will hear that you have been
killed by me. Having sent you, he will today be overcome with shame. Today, Partha Dhananjaya will get to know
about my valour. He will see you slain, lying down on the ground and covered with blood. Today, you will clash
with me and I have always desired this for a long time. In the ancient battle between the gods and the asuras, this
will be like the one between Shakra and Bali. O Satvata! I will grant you an extremely terrible encounter today.
You will get to know the true nature of my valour, strength and manliness. Having been killed by me in the battle,
you will go to Yama's residence, just as Ravana's son[Indrajit.] was slain by Lakshmana, Rama's younger brother. O
Madhava! Today, Krishna, Partha and Dharmaraja will witness your death and there is no doubt that they will lose
all enthusiasm and give up the battle. O Madhava! Today, I will cause your death with sharp arrows and delight the
wives of those who have been killed by you in the battle. O Madhava! Now that you have come within the range of
my vision, you will not escape, like a small deer that has approached a lion.' O king! Yuyudhana laughed and
replied, 'O Kouraveya! I am never frightened in a battle. A person who disarms me is the only one who is capable
of killing me in an encounter. He who kills me in battle today, will continue to kill for a long time to come[The sense is that such a person will continue to be victorious for a long time.].
What is the point of talking a lot? Do what you have spoken about. You are as fruitless as the roar of clouds during
the autumn. O brave one! On hearing your roars, laughter is generated in me. O Kourava! In this world, you have
desired this encounter for a long time. Let it commence. O father[The word used is tata, in the sense of senior. Bhurishrava's father, Somadatta, and Satyaki's grandfather, Shini,
were contemporaries and rivals. Therefore, Bhurishrava was considerably older than Satyaki.]! In my heart, I also wish to fight with you and
let us act swiftly. O wretch among men! I will not retreat without killing you today.' Those bulls among men castigated each other with those words. Each of them wished to kill the other and in that battle, struck each other in
great anger. Those two tigers among men challenged each other and clashed against each other in the encounter,
striking strongly. They were like crazy and angry elephants, fighting for the sake of a she-elephant.

'"Bhurishrava and Satyaki, scorchers of enemies, were like clouds and showered down terrible torrents of arrows on each other. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Having shrouded Shini's descendant with arrows, Somadatta's son wished to kill him and pierced him with sharp arrows. Somadatta's son pierced Satyaki with ten arrows and wishing to kill the bull of the Shini lineage, released many other sharp arrows at him. O lord of the earth!
O lord! But before those sharp arrows could reach him, Satyaki used the maya of his weapons to slice them down
in the air. Those two supreme and brave ones, born in noble lineages and the extenders of the fame of the Kurus
and the Vrishnis, brought down separate showers of arrows on each other. They were like tigers fighting with their
claws, or giant elephants with their tusks. They used spears[Rathashakti.] and arrows released from bows to mangle each other. They mangled each other's bodies and made blood flow from the wounds. They confounded each other in a
gambling match in which their lives were the stake. Those two, the extenders of the fame of the Kuru and Vrishni
lineages, fought against each other in this way and performed supreme deeds. They were like the leaders of elephant herds. Placing the world of Brahma in front of them[That is, desiring Brahma's world after death.], they fought for a long time there, seeking to defeat
each other and kill each other. Satyaki and Somadatta's son showered down arrows on each other. And these showers delighted the sons of Dhritarashtra, who were looking on. The people who were there also witnessed the fight
between these two supreme warriors. They fought like elephants seeking a she-elephant in the herd.

'"They slew each other's horses and severed each other's bows. Devoid of their chariots in the great battle, they
clashed and fought with swords. They took up large, beautiful and colourful shields made out of the hides of bulls.
They unsheathed their swords and roamed around in that encounter. They traversed various paths and executed circular motions. Those two scorchers of enemies were angry and repeatedly struck each other. They possessed
swords and were clad in colourful armour. They had golden armlets and ornaments. O king! In the battle, they
were intoxicated with the encounter and made thrusts at each other. O Indra among kings! In a short instant, they
tired each other out. While all the soldiers looked on, those brave ones again regained their composure. They severed those large and beautiful shields with the swords. When those were severed, the tigers among men engaged in
a bout of wrestling. They had broad chests and long arms. They were skilled in fighting at close quarters[The text uses the word niyuddha, which means boxing, wrestling or hand-to-hand combat.]. They
attacked each other with arms that were like iron clubs. They struck each other with those arms, grabbed each other and seized each other. They had obtained strength through learning and delighted all the other warriors. O king!
As those supreme men fought on in that battle, a terrible and loud sound arose, as if thunder was striking against a
mountain. They were like elephants goring each other with the tips of their tusks, or giant bulls with their horns.
Those great-souled ones, bulls among the Kuru and Satvata lineages, fought on.

'"While Satvata was fighting and his weapons were exhausted, Vasudeva spoke to Arjuna. 'Behold. The foremost among all those who wield the bow is fighting in this encounter, though he is without a chariot. O Pandava!
Following you, he penetrated the army of the Bharatas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Arjuna was also descended from the Bharata lineage.]! The immensely
brave one fought with all the Bharatas. The best of warriors is exhausted and has now confronted
Bhuridakshina[We have used Bhuridakshina as a proper name and as another name for Bhurishrava. Given the shloka, this
seems natural. However, bhuridakshina can also be an adjective, in which case, Bhurishrava is being described
as someone who has given away a lot of donations.], who is advancing with a desire to fight. O Arjuna! This is not fair. Bhurishrava is invincible in
battle and is angry with Satyaki.' O king! Like maddened elephants, those two got ready to kill each other. O king!
Those two foremost among warriors were enraged and rushed against each other in their chariots, while Keshava
and Arjuna were spectators to the encounter. Krishna spoke to the mighty-armed Arjuna. 'Behold. The tiger of the
Vrishni and Andhaka lineages has succumbed to Somadatta's son. Having performed an extremely difficult task,
he is now lying down on the ground. O Arjuna! The brave one is tired and you should protect Satyaki. O supreme
among those who slay enemies! Let him not succumb to the performer of sacrifices[Referring to Bhurishrava.]. O tiger among men! O
lord! Quickly do what must be done.' Having been thus addressed by Vasudeva, Dhananjaya cheerfully replied,
'Look. The brave one among the Vrishnis and the bull of the Kuru lineage are sporting. They are like giant and
crazy elephants in the forest, playing with herds of lions.'

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! At that time, a giant lamentation arose among the soldiers. The mighty-
armed one[Bhurishrava.] struck and brought Satyaki down on the ground. Bhuridakshina, the best of the Kurus, dragged the
foremost of the Satvata lineage, like a lion dragging an elephant and looked beautiful in the battle. In that encounter, Bhurishrava unsheathed his sword and grasping him by the hair, struck him in the chest with his foot. O
king! On seeing that Satvata was thus being dragged in the battle, Vasudeva again spoke to Arjuna. 'Behold. The
tiger among the Vrishnis and the Andhakas has succumbed to Somadatta's son. O mighty-armed one! He is your
student and he is not inferior to you in archery. O Partha! Truth is Satyaki's valour. But in this battle, Varshneya's
valour has been rendered false by Bhurishrava.' Having been thus addressed by Vasudeva in the battle, the mighty-
armed Pandava mentally worshipped Bhurishrava and said, 'I am glad that the extender of the deeds of the Kuru
lineage is only dragging the best of the Satvata lineage in this battle and sporting with him. He has not killed
Satyaki, the foremost among the brave ones of the Vrishni lineage. He is dragging him, like the king of deer dragging a giant elephant in the forest.' O king! Having thus worshipped Kourava in his mind, the mighty-armed
Partha Arjuna replied to Vasudeva, 'O Madhava! Since my sight was fixed on Saindhava, I did not see anything
else. For the sake of the Yadava, I will perform an extremely difficult task.' Having spoken these words to Vasudeva, Pandava used an arrow to sever the arm, which held the sword, of the one who was devoted to sacrifices[Bhurishrava.]."'