'Lomasha said, "Having heard that the maharshi had arrived with the kings at the borders of his kingdom, Ilvala
went out with his advisers, to show them his respects. O Kouravya! The best of asuras offered them his hospitality.
He then cooked his brother Vatapi well. On seeing that the great asura Vatapi had been cooked as meat, all the rajarshis were miserable and lost their senses. But Agastya, supreme among rishis, told the rajarshis, 'You should not
act out of despondence. I will eat up the great asura.' Then the great rishi seated himself on the best seat. Ilvala,
king of the daityas, smilingly served him. Agastya then ate up all of Vatapi. When the eating was over, the asura
Ilvala summoned him[Vatapi.]. O son! But the great-souled Agastya only belched[Literally, the text says that he released some wind.]. On seeing that the great asura
had been digested, Ilvala was distressed. He joined his hands in salutation, and together with his advisers, asked,
'Why have you come? Tell me what I can do for you.' At that, Agastya smiled and replied, 'O asura! We know
your powers and that you are the lord of all riches. These ones are not that rich and my need for riches is great.
Give us a share according to your capacity, but without taking away from others.' At that, Ilvala bowed in obeisance before the rishi and told him, 'If you know what I intend to give you, I will give you those riches.' Agastya
replied, 'O asura! You intend to give the kings ten thousand cows each. O great asura! You wish to give them that
much of gold. You wish to give me twice that much and a golden chariot. O great asura! You wish to give me two
steeds with the speed of thought. Go and ask and you will find that the chariot is made of gold.' O Kounteya! On
asking, it was found that the chariot was indeed made of gold. Miserably, the daitya gave them a lot of riches. The
horses Vivaja and Suvaja were yoked to the chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the twinkling of an
eye, all those riches were carried to Agastya's hermitage.

'"Agastya gave the rajarshis permission to leave. Then the sage did all that Lopamudra had desired. Lopamudra
said, 'O illustrious one! You have done everything that I had desired. Now beget on me a son who is supreme in
valour.' Agastya replied, 'O fortunate one! O beautiful one! I am pleased with your conduct. Listen as I tell you
what I am thinking about the offspring. You can have a thousand sons, or a hundred equal to ten each, or ten equal
to a hundred each, or one equal to a thousand.' Lopamudra said, 'O one rich in austerities! Let me have one son
who is equal to one thousand. One learned and virtuous son is superior to many who are not righteous.' The sage
promised that it would be that way. At the right time, he faithfully united with his wife, who was his equal in conduct and devotion. When the embryo had been conceived, he went away to the forest. When he had left for the forest, the embryo developed for seven autumns. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the seventh year had
passed, an immensely wise son was born. He blazed in his powers and his name was Dridhasyu. That great and energetic rishi became that rishi's[Agastya's.] son. The immensely famous one issued forth, as if reciting the Vedas and the
Upanishads and their branches. Even as a child, that energetic one used to carry loads of kindling in his father's
house and thus came to have the name of Idhmavaha[Idhma is fuel or firewood for the sacrificial fire and vaha means to bear.]. On seeing him thus endowed, the sage was delighted. O
king! Thus did the ancestors obtain the worlds they desired. This is Agastya's famous hermitage, adorned everywhere with flowers. This is where Vatapi of Prahrada's lineage was destroyed by Agastya. O king! His hermitage
is beautiful and possesses all the qualities. You should bathe as you wish in this sacred Bhagirathi."'
