Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Having experienced the great rajasuya sacrifice of King Yudhishthira, wishing to do
well to Duryodhana and having already heard Duryodhana's words about what he desired, Soubala Shakuni went
to Dhritarashtra with Gandhari's son[Duryodhana's mother was Gandhari.]. The lord of the earth was wise, though he was without sight, and was seated. Approaching the immensely intelligent one, Shakuni uttered these words. "O great king! O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Duryodhana is pale, yellow and thin. Notice that he is miserable and is always worrying. Why do
you not examine and determine the exact reasons why your eldest son is so miserable with a grief that can only result from an enemy?" Dhritarashtra asked, "O Duryodhana! O son! What is the reason for your great grief? O
son[The word nandana is again used, so it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.] of the Kuru lineage! If it is something that I can hear, please tell me. This Shakuni tells me that you are pale,
yellow and thin and that you are worrying. I do not see any reason for your grief. O son! All my great riches are
given to you. Your brothers and well-wishers never act so as to cause you displeasure. You wear the best of garments. You eat food laced with meat. You ride thoroughbred horses. Why are you then yellow and thin? Expensive
beds, beautiful women, houses with all the qualities and pleasure grounds are there for your happiness. As with the
gods, there is no doubt that all these await your command. O invincible one! O son! Why do you then grieve like a
miserable one?"

'Duryodhana replied, "Like any miserable man, I do eat and dress. But I tolerate the passing of time, because I
bear a terrible envy. He is truly a man who vanquishes his enemies and liberates his own subjects from the oppression of that enemy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Satisfaction and pride destroy prosperity, so do compassion and fear. Immersed in these, no one achieves greatness. Having witnessed Kounteya Yudhishthira's blazing
prosperity, I no longer find pleasure and that is what turns me pale. It is true that the prosperity of Kunti's son is
invisible to me now. But I see the prosperity of my enemies and my own destitution as if before me now. It is for
this reason that I have become pale, miserable, yellow and thin. Yudhishthira supports eighty-eight thousand snataka householders and each of them has thirty servant maidens. Besides this, ten thousand others always eat the best
of food in Yudhishthira's house, served on golden plates. The king of Kamboja sends him black, dark and red skins
of the kadali[Also known as kadala.] deer, expensive blankets, chariots, women and cattle and horses in hundreds and thousands. A hundred she-camels roam there three hundred times. O lord of the earth! The kings brought diverse riches in great
numbers to that foremost of sacrifices undertaken by Kunti's son. I have never seen nor heard of such an inflow of
wealth as I saw at the sacrifice of the intelligent son of Pandu. O king! O lord! I cannot be at peace and continuously worry because I have seen that limitless flood of riches of my enemy. Vatadhana[A vatadhana is a brahmana, who has been born of a brahmana mother and a father who is a brahmana but an
outcast.] brahmanas, possessing the
wealth of cattle, stood at the gate in groups of one hundred. They brought three kharvas[A kharva is simply a very large number, 1 followed by 10 zeroes, or 10 billion.] of riches as tribute, but
were turned back. When they brought beautiful golden kamandalus[Water pots used by ascetics.] and filled these with tribute, it was then that
they were allowed entry. In Varuna's brass pots, the ocean brought him ambrosia[The word used in the text is madhu.] that was better than the one
brought for Shakra by the wives of the immortals. There were one thousand of them[The pots.], adorned with many jewels
and golden. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing all this, I felt as if afflicted with fever. They obtained
these by going to the oceans of the east and the south[A reference to the Pandava conquests.]. They had also gone to the west. But no one can go to the
north, except the birds. Listen to me as I describe an extraordinary incident there. Whenever one hundred thousand
brahmanas had been fed, it was arranged there that a signal would always be given through the blowing of conch
shells. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I continuously heard the repeated blowing of conch shells[That is, large numbers of brahmanas were continuously being fed.]. On hearing these great sounds, my hair stood up on end. O lord of men! Many kings crowded the place as spectators. O
great king! Those kings brought all kinds of riches with them, when they came to the sacrifice of the intelligent son
of Pandu. Like vaishyas, the lords of the earth became servers to the brahmanas. O king! The king of the gods,
Yama, Varuna, or the lord of the guhyakas[Kubera.] does not possess riches equal to Yudhishthira's wealth. Ever since I
have witnessed the overwhelming prosperity of Pandu's son, my heart has been burning and I can find no peace."

'Shakuni said, "O you whose valour is in truth! Listen to the means whereby you can obtain the unmatched
prosperity that you have seen with the Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am skilled in playing with
dice, supreme on earth. I know their heart[Of the dice.]. I know how to stake. I know the special art. Though Kounteya[Yudhishthira.]
loves dice, he has no knowledge. If challenged, he will certainly come. I will challenge him."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed by Shakuni, King Duryodhana then instantly addressed these
words to Dhritarasthra, "O king! This one[Shakuni.] is skilled in dice. Through dice, he will win the wealth of Pandu's
son. Please grant him permission." Dhritarashtra replied, "I always follow the counsel of my immensely wise adviser, Kshatta[Vidura.]. I will consult with him and then decide on the course of action. He places dharma in the forefront, has foresight and has our supreme welfare in mind. He will look at both sides[The pros and cons of the decision.] and tell us certainly what
should be done." Duryodhana said, "If you ask Kshatta, he will restrain you. O Indra among kings! And if you are
restrained, I will certainly kill myself. O king! When I am dead, may you find happiness with Vidura. Enjoy the
whole earth. What do you have to do with me?" Dhritarashtra heard those painful words, though they were affectionately uttered. Submitting to Duryodhana's desire, he instructed his servants. "Let artisans immediately build for
me a beautiful and large sabha, with a thousand pillars and a hundred doors, which is fit to be seen. When it is scattered with gems and dice everywhere, quietly come and report to me that it has been built well and that it is fit to
be entered." O great king! In an attempt to pacify Duryodhana, Dhritarasthra, lord of the earth, summoned Vidura,
because he never took a decision without asking Vidura. Knowing the evils of gambling, he was still attracted towards it because of affection towards his son.

'Having heard this, the intelligent Vidura knew that the door to kali[The advent of kali yuga was imminent.] was nigh. On seeing that the path to destruction was about to be opened, he quickly came to Dhritarashtra. The brother came to the great-souled elder
brother and bowing down, with his head touching the other's feet, uttered these words. "O king! O lord! I do not
approve of the decision you have taken. You should act in such a way that discord does not arise among your
sons[The word sons is being used in a broad sense, as the Pandavas are also like Dhritarashtra's sons.] because of this gambling." Dhritarashtra replied, "O Kshatta! If the gods in heaven show us their favour,
there is no doubt that there will be no quarrel between my sons and my other sons. Auspicious or not auspicious,
benign or malign, let this gambling match between relatives, occur, as it is certainly destined. When I and Bhishma, bull among the Bharata lineage, are there, no evil can possibly occur, even if fate has decreed it. Immediately
ascend a chariot that is yoked with steeds with the speed of the wind. Go to Khandavaprastha and bring Yudhishthira. O Vidura! I tell you that there will be no going back on my decision. I think it is supreme destiny that has
led to this." Having heard this, the intelligent Vidura thought that this should not be. Extremely unhappy, he went
to the immensely wise son of the river[He went to Bhishma, Ganga's son.].'