Vaishampayana said, 'The great-spirited Kripa was supreme among wielders of weapons. He was immensely valorous and powerful. Meanwhile, in a desire to fight with Arjuna, that maharatha arrived. Those two immensely
powerful charioteers, like the sun, got ready to fight. They stationed themselves, looking like two clouds in the autumn. Partha was famous in the world. Drawing the supreme weapon of Gandiva, he discharged many iron arrows
that were capable of piercing the heart. But using sharp arrows and iron arrows that drank blood, Kripa sliced
Partha's arrows into hundreds of thousands of pieces, before they could reach him. At that, maharatha Partha was
enraged, and exhibiting many circular movements, enveloped the directions with a shower of arrows. The lord
Partha, whose soul was infinite, covered the sky with arrows and unleashed hundreds of them on Kripa. He was hit
by sharp arrows that were like the crests of fire and enraged, released one thousand arrows on the infinitely energetic Partha. The great-souled Kripa roared on the field of battle. Then the brave Arjuna released four swift arrows,
golden at the tips and with straight shafts, from Gandiva and pierced his[Kripa's.] horses. The four horses were pierced
with those excellent arrows. Struck by those sharp arrows that were like flaming serpents, all the horses suddenly
reared up and Kripa was dislodged from his place. When the descendant of the Kuru lineage[Arjuna.] saw that
Goutama[Kripa was descended from the Goutama lineage, since Sharadvat was Goutama's grandson.] had been dislodged from his place, the destroyer of enemy warriors did not pierce him, with a desire
to preserve his honour. Having regained his position, Goutama swiftly pierced Savyasachi with ten arrows that
were shafted with the feathers of herons. Then Partha sliced his bow with a sharp arrow and made it fall down
from his hand. He broke off the armour with other sharp arrows that pierced the heart. However, Partha did not
pierce the body. Freed of the armour, his body was radiant, like a snake shedding its skin at the right time. When
one bow had been cut down by Partha, Goutama grasped another and strung it. It was extraordinary. Kunti's son
cut that down too, with arrows that had smooth shafts. In this way, Sharadvat's son took up many other bows in his
hand. But Pandava, the destroyer of enemy warriors, cut them all down. With all his arrows shattered, the powerful
charioteer picked up a javelin and hurled it at Pandu's son, like flaming lightning. That javelin was embellished
with gold and descended from the sky, like a giant meteor. But Arjuna cut it down with ten arrows. When it was
brought down onto the ground by the intelligent Partha, it shattered into ten pieces. In between, Kripa grasped arrows and a bow and swiftly pierced Partha with ten sharp arrows. The greatly energetic Partha was angered in battle. He retaliated with thirteen arrows that had been sharpened on stone, as energetic as the fire. He struck down the
yoke with one and used four arrows to kill the four horses. Using a sixth, he sliced off the charioteer's head from
the body. In that battle, the immensely strong one cut down the bamboo poles with three and the axles of the
wheels with two. With a twelfth arrow, he sliced down the standard. Then smilingly, Phalguna, smote Kripa on the
chest with a thirteenth arrow that was like the vajra. His bow was shattered. He was bereft of his chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was dead. Kripa quickly jumped down with a club in his hand and hurled a club. But
that heavy and decorated club was repulsed by Arjuna with his arrows. To save the intolerant Sharadvat in that
field of battle, all the warriors then showered Partha with arrows from all sides. Virata's son, the charioteer, then
turned the horses to the left, executing a yamaka turn[Yamaka means double, as well as restraint. So this was some kind of double turn and could have been a figure
of eight.], so as to restrain those fighters. Extremely swiftly, those
bulls among men then took Kripa, who was without a chariot, away from Kunti's son Dhananjaya.'
