'Yudhishthira said, "The supreme forms of dharma may not be available and people of diverse kinds may
transgress it. Every means of sustenance on earth may have been taken over by bandits. O grandfather! When
that worst of times arrives, how will a brahmana survive, assuming that out of affection, he does not abandon
his sons and grandsons?"

'Bhishma replied, "When such a time arrives, he should survive through the strength of his ability to differentiate[The word used is vijnana, not jnana. Therefore, it isn't quite straightforward knowledge.]. Everything is for the virtuous. There is nothing for the wicked. If someone takes from the wicked and
gives it to those who are virtuous, he is knowledgeable about all forms of dharma and ensures a passage for
himself. O king! He can seize things that have not been given, thinking, 'These riches are mine and I will give
them away,' as long as he does not do this wrathfully and does not cause outrage in the kingdom. If a person
uses vijnana to purify his strength, even if he should be censured, he will not be censured, because he is patient
and his conduct is based on vijnana. Those whose conduct depends on the exercise of strength find no other
means appealing. O Yudhishthira! Their strength is enhanced through the use of energy. Medium people serve
the dictates of the ordinary sacred texts, without any discrimination[The sacred texts are meant for normal situations.]. However, those who are intelligent adopt
something that is beyond this. Officiating priests, priests, preceptors and brahmanas must always be treated
well and worshipped. Acting contrary to this is a sin[The idea is that even in times of adversity, they must not be taxed.]. These are the norms of the world and the eternal foresight. This is the standard in which one must be submerged to determine if one is virtuous or wicked. Many
who live in villages will angrily say things about each other. A king should not pay attention to these words
and act on that basis[Reward and punishment should not be based on hearsay and slander.]. Slander must never be spoken, nor heard. The ears must be covered, or one should go
somewhere else. The conduct of virtuous people does not encompass slander and calumny. O Yudhishthira!
Those who are virtuous only speak about the qualities of righteous people. Two well-trained draught animals,
tamed and both capable of bearing an equal load, are good at bearing a burden. The king should be like that.
He is the one who really bears the burden, aides come after that. Some think that conduct is the most important
indication of dharma. Others do not like this and prefer Shankha and Likhita instead[The scrupulous adherence to dharma on the part of Shankha and Likhita,
also involving a king punishing a brahmana.]. They do not speak such
words out of malice or greed. There are rishis who have held that the perpetrators of wrong deeds must be exiled[Even if they are brahmanas.]. However, if someone is like a rishi, there are no norms for this. Perhaps the gods should punish these
worst among men, who perpetrate perverse acts. If something is obtained through deceit, dharma suffers.
Those who are virtuous must be honoured in every way, because they are the reason for prosperity. This must
be accepted in one's heart and it establishes dharma. He who knows about the four qualities that establish
dharma is one who truly knows about dharma[The four qualities are metaphysics/logic, the Vedas, economic
welfare/prosperity and dandaniti. Alternatively, the Vedas, the smriti
texts, customary law and what one personally regards to be dharma.]. Like following a snake, it is extremely difficult to determine
the path of dharma. When a deer is pierced, a hunter of deer follows in its footsteps by tracking drops of blood
in the grass. That is the way one must follow the path of dharma. O one without decay! O Yudhishthira! You
must follow the path of the virtuous with humility. Follow the conduct observed by the rajarshis."'
