The brahmana said, 'In this connection, there is an ancient history. Listen to the ordinances for the ten officiating priests[The Critical Edition excises some shlokas. The missing shlokas tell us that the ten officiating priests are ears,
eyes, tongue, nose, feet, hands, the genital organs and the anus. If ears and eyes are counted in the singular, but
feet and hands in the plural, this gives a total of ten.]. Know everything about this. Consider the consciousness with the tool of knowledge. Know
that all those who bear bodies sustain their bodily forms with the aid of semen. The garhapatya fire is said to be
the sustainer of the body. The ahavaniya fire is the one into which oblations are offered[The garhapatya fire is in the body and the ahavaniya fire is in the mind.]. Word was born from that
and also the source from which words are pronounced. Form manifested itself from that and began to follow the
mind.'

'"The brahmani asked, 'Why did word originate first and why was mind created afterwards? Words are seen to
be pronounced after they have been thought of by the mind. Through what knowledge and what yoga can one say
that intelligence is based on consciousness? When it is raised up, why can't it follow? What restrains it[This is cryptic and requires explanation. When one is asleep, the mind doesn't seem to exist. But the breath of
life still continues to be raised. If it is distinct from the mind, why can't it be used to sense things? What restrains it?]?'
'"The brahmana replied, 'Apana is the lord. Therefore, it is the one that despatches everything. It is said to control the mind and mind controls intelligence. However, you have asked me a question about word and the mind.
Therefore, I will recount to you a rivalry that took place between them. Both word and mind went to the jivatman
and asked a question. "O lord! Dispel a doubt that exists in our minds. Which among us is superior? Tell us." The
illustrious one told the goddess of speech, "The mind is superior." However, word responded, "I am the one who
leads to the accomplishment of desire." Know that I have two kinds of minds, mobile and immobile[The brahmana is repeating the jivatman's response.]. The immobile is with me and the mobile is your dominion. That in your dominion depends on mantras, syllables and sound.
Therefore, the mind that is immobile is superior[This is extremely cryptic and requires interpretation. The immobile mind is internal. The mobile mind means the
external world, which is subject to perception by the senses. This mobile mind is inferior to the immobile mind.]. O beautiful one[This is being addressed to the goddess of speech.]! However, you came to me of your own accord  and  spoke  to  me.  O  Sarasvati!  Therefore,  I  pronounce  your  name.  O  goddess!  You  are  always  based  in
speech, in the space between prana and apana. O  immensely fortunate one! However,  in prana's  absence, you
rushed towards Prajapati and asked the illustrious one to rescue you. At this, prana manifested itself and the word
appeared again. That is the reason why, when there is inhalation alone, no words can ever be pronounced. Syllables are always either aspirated or unaspirated. Among these two, the unaspirated ones are superior to the aspirated
ones. O one who speaks about the eternal brahman! You are always excellent, like a cow that yields a large quantity of milk. O Bharati! O one with the beautiful smiles! You are like a cow. You are both divine and not divine in
your powers[This probably means divine and human speech.]. Behold the subtle difference between these two.'

'"The brahmani asked, 'Earlier, when she wished to speak, but words did not come out, what did the goddess
Sarasvati say?'

'"The brahmana replied, 'The body results from prana. Apana follows from prana. It then becomes udana and is
released from the body. It then envelopes all the directions with vyana. After that, it remains established in samana.
This has been stated earlier. Thus, the immobile mind is superior. And the goddess of speech is superior to the mobile mind.'"'
