Vaishampayana said, 'The maharshis who were the equals of the gods performed Pandu's last rites. Then the ascetics assembled and consulted each other. "For the welfare of the kingdom and the country, the great-souled great
ascetic came here, to live among ascetics and practise austerities. King Pandu has gone to heaven and has left his
sons, who have just been born, and his wife as a treasure we must look after." Having consulted with each other,
those who are engaged in the welfare of all beings decided to go to the city of Nagasahrya[Hastinapura.], with Pandu's sons
in front of them. Those generous and accomplished ones decided on the journey, so as to give the Pandavas to
Bhishma and Dhritarashtra. As soon as they decided, the ascetics set out at that very moment, with Pandu's sons
and wife and the two bodies[There were parts of the bodies that had not been burnt. Having said this, there is some contradiction about
when the bodies were burnt.].

'Earlier, she had always been used to a life of comfort. Now, out of affection for her sons, she thought that the
long road was actually short. Within a short time, she reached Kurujangala and the illustrious one came to the
chief[The word used is vardhaman, which means increasing. This has been translated as the chief gate. But it is
perfectly possible for this to have been the proper name for the gate.] gate of the city. The citizens of Nagapura[Another name for Hastinapura.] were astounded on learning that thousands of charanas and
sages had come to their city. It was the moment of sunrise. After paying their respects to dharma, the inhabitants of
the city and their wives came out to see the ascetics. Masses of women, Kshatriyas, vehicles and Brahmanas with
their wives emerged, and large masses of Vaishyas and Shudras too. Their minds were all on dharma and there was
no cause for disturbance. Shantanu's son Bhishma, Somadatta's son Bahlika, the rajarshi with the sight of
wisdom[Dhritarashtra.], the kshatta Vidura himself, and surrounded by maids, the queen Satyavati, the illustrious Kousalya
and Gandhari, emerged through the royal gate. Dhritarashtra's 100 sons, with Duryodhana at the forefront, also
came out, adorned in myriad ornaments. On seeing the masses of maharshis, the Kouravas and their priests bowed
their heads in homage and sat down below them. The citizens of the town and the country also bowed their heads
down to the ground and sat down below them. On seeing that the crowd was completely quiet, Bhishma offered
the kingdom and the country to the maharshis.

'At this, with the concurrence of the other maharshis, the eldest maharshi, with matted hair and a deerskin as his
garment, spoke: "King Pandu of the Kuru lineage gave up a life of desire and pleasure and left for Shatashringa.
He lived the life of a brahmachari there. But to accomplish the purposes of the gods, this son Yudhishthira was
born there from Dharma himself. Then that great-souled king was given another son named Bhima by
Matarishva[Another name for Vayu.] and he is immensely powerful, best among those who are strong. Puruhuta[Indra.] gave Kunti this son.
Truth is his strength and his exploits will shadow those of all other great archers. These two sons of Madri are
great archers and supreme among those of the Kuru lineage. They were born from the Ashvins and are tigers
among men. The illustrious Pandu always lived a life of dharma in the forest and in this way he revived his ancestral lineage. As he witnessed the birth, growth and study of the Vedas of his sons, Pandu always derived great pleasure. He never deviated from the righteous path. Having left these sons, Pandu has departed for the land of the ancestors seventeen days ago. On seeing him on the funeral pyre and about to be consumed by the face of the fire,
Madri entered the fire and gave up her own life. She has followed to the world of her husband. Now perform those
rites that should be performed for them. These are the two bodies and here are the supreme sons. Let these
scorchers of enemies and their mother be respectfully received with rites of welcome. After the performance of the
funeral rites, let Pandu, the upholder of the Kuru lineage, extremely famous and knowledgeable in all aspects of
dharma, gain the right to ancestral offerings." Having thus addressed the Kurus, all the charanas, guhyakas, rishis
and siddhas vanished in an instant before the eyes of the Kurus, like a city of the gandharvas, leading to great
amazement.'
