'Dhritarashtra said, "Our army possesses many kinds of soldiers, who are supreme and have been tested. O Sanjaya! They are many and have been arrayed in the proper way. They have always been honoured by us and have
always been devoted to us. They are mature[That is, the soldiers are not new and callow recruits.] and are wonderful in form. The firmness and valour have been
seen earlier. They are not aged, nor young. They are not thin, nor are they obese. They are agile and tall and all
their limbs are free of disease. They are adorned with armour and have many kinds of weapons. They are accomplished in many kinds of knowledge connected with weapons. They know how to ascend on the shoulders[Of mounts like elephants.], advance and retreat. They are accomplished in striking, moving forward and back. They have been tested in many
ways, on elephants, horses and chariots. They have been examined properly and have been paid their wages, not
on account of lineage, favour or relationships[The wages are based on merit, not on lineage, favours or relationships.]. They have not arrived without being summoned. Nor have soldiers in my army not been paid. They have been born in good lineages and are noble. They are contented, well fed
and submissive. They have been rewarded well. They are illustrious and spirited. O son[The word used is tata.]! They are sustained by
the best of men, who are the equals of the guardians of the worlds. These are the foremost of advisers and many
others who have performed the best of deeds. There are many kings who wish to do what is beneficial for us and
protect them. They have voluntarily sided with us, with their forces and their followers. Our army is like a giant
ocean, with flowing rivers merging into it from every direction. It possesses many chariots and horses. Though
they are without wings, they are like birds. The large number of warriors constitutes the water. The fierce mounts
are the waves. There are catapults, swords, maces, spears, lances, arrows and javelins that are like fish. There are
standards and ornaments, decorated with bejewelled garments. The advancing mounts are like the force of the
wind that agitates it[The ocean.]. Drona is the fathomless nether regions. Kritavarma is a giant lake. Jalasandha is a giant
crocodile. Karna is the rising moon[Leading to the ebb and flow of the waters.]. O Sanjaya! When that bull among the Pandavas[Arjuna.] swiftly entered and
penetrated my ocean of soldiers on a single chariot and Yuyudhana followed him, I do not see any remnant being
left. O Sanjaya! After Savyasachi penetrated my soldiers, so did Satvata, supreme among rathas. On seeing those
two valiant ones fearlessly and spiritedly advance and on seeing the king of Sindhu within the reach of Gandiva's
arrows, what did the Kurus do, driven by destiny? When that terrible time arrived, what happened to them? O son!
I think that the assembled Kouravas were devoured by death. Today, their valour in battle can no longer be seen. In
the battle, Krishna and Pandava have penetrated, without being injured. O Sanjaya! There is no one who can resist
them. There are many paid warriors and tested maharathas. Some have been paid due wages and others served
with pleasant words. O son! There is no one among my soldiers who has not been served, without due cause. The
devoted ones have all obtained due wages, in accordance with their deeds. O Sanjaya! There is no warrior in my
army who has been paid less than what is his due. O son! There is no man who has not been paid. To the best of
my capacity, they have been honoured with gifts, honours and seats. O son! My sons, kith and kin have also acted
in the same way. But when they confronted Savyasachi in the battle, they have been vanquished. They have been
supremely crushed by Shini's descendant. Other than destiny, what can this be? O Sanjaya! Those who are the protectors and those who are being protected are following the same path, the protectors, as well as those who are protected. On seeing Arjuna stationed in the battle in front of Saindhava, what did my extremely foolish son do? On
seeing Satyaki fearlessly penetrate in the battle, what course of action, appropriate to the occasion, did Duryodhana
adopt? Those supreme rathas, who are beyond the reach of all weapons, penetrated the army. On witnessing this in
the encounter, what did those on my side decide to do? On beholding Dasharha Krishna stationed for Arjuna's sake
and on seeing the bull among the Shini lineage, I think that my sons must have been full of sorrow. On seeing that
Satvata and Arjuna had passed through the soldiers and that the Kurus were running away, I think that my sons
must have been full of sorrow. On seeing that the rathas were routed and had lost interest in subjugating the enemy
and on seeing that they had set their minds on running away, I think that my sons must have been full of sorrow.
The seats of the chariots were rendered empty by Satvata and Arjuna. On seeing that the warriors were slain, I
think that my sons must have been full of sorrow. On seeing horses, elephants and chariots and thousands of brave
ones anxiously running away from the field of battle, I think that my sons must have been full of sorrow. Horses
were deprived of brave ones. Men were deprived of their chariots by Satyaki and Partha. I think that my sons must
have been full of sorrow. On seeing that all the masses of infantry had given up all hope of victory and were running away in every direction, I think that my sons must have been full of sorrow. On seeing that those two brave
ones had instantly passed through Drona's array, without being defeated, I think that my sons must have been full
of sorrow. O son! I am extremely benumbed on hearing that Krishna and Dhananjaya, the ones without decay, have
penetrated my soldiers, together with Satvata. Shini's descendant, supreme among rathas, penetrated the army. After he had passed through Bhoja's array, what did the Kouravas do? O Sanjaya! Tell me everything about how
Drona afflicted the Pandus in the battle and how that battle progressed there. Drona is brave and powerful. He is
skilled in the use of weapons and is firm in his valour. How did the Panchalas fight against that great archer in the
battle? Desiring Dharmaraja's victory, they are firm in their enmity towards Drona. Bharadvaja's maharatha son is
also firm in his enmity towards them. Wishing to kill the king of Sindhu, what did Arjuna do? O Sanjaya! You are
skilled in this. Tell me everything about what transpired."'
