Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana rishi! Sankhya, yoga, pancharatra, the Vedas and the Aranyakas-these kinds of
knowledge are prevalent in the worlds. O sage! Do they speak about the same thing, or different things? Tell me
what I have asked and in due order, describe the rites that they prescribe.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'A son was born to maharshi Parashara and Gandhavati in the midst of an island[Vedavyasa.]. He
is infinite and knows a lot. He is the knowledge that dispels darkness. I bow down before him. Learned ones speak
about his power and say that he is the sixth one, even before the grandfather[The preceding five probably mean Purusha, Vasudeva, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Samkarshana.]. Dvaipayana was the single son[His parents had no other son.]
who was born as part of Narayana. He is the great store of the Vedas. He is immensely powerful and was born at
that time of darkness[The sage Parashara created mist and darkness when Parashara and Satyavati were together.]. Narayana, the great store of the brahman, created the generous and energetic one as his
son. Thus, the great-souled Vyasa is actually ancient and without birth.'

Janamejaya said, 'O best among brahmanas! It has been said that, earlier, Vasishtha had a son named Shakti and
that Shakti's son was Parashara. Parashara's son was the sage Krishna Dvaipayana. However, you have also spoken about him as Narayana's son. Did the infinitely energetic Vyasa have an earlier birth? Tell me about that excellent birth, when he was born from Narayana.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'My preceptor desired to know about the purport of the Vedas. He was devoted to dharma and was the store of austerities. Devoted to knowledge, he spent some time on the slopes of the Himalayas.
Having composed the account of the Mahabharata, the intelligent one was exhausted and performed austerities. O
king! At that time, we tended to him-Sumantu, Jaimini, Paila, extremely firm in his vows, I as the fourth disciple,
and Shuka, Vyasa's son. Vyasa was thus surrounded by five excellent disciples. He was resplendent on the slope of
the Himalayas, like the lord of the demons[Shiva.], surrounded by the demons. After having been instructed about the
Vedas, the Vedangas, the Mahabharata and all their meanings, we worshipped the generous one, when he was reflecting in his mind. In the course of the conversation, we asked that supreme among brahmanas to tell us about the
meanings of the Vedas, the meanings of the Mahabharata and about Narayana's birth. The one who knew the truth
first told us about the meanings of the Vedas and the meanings of the Mahabharata. He next told us about his birth
from Narayana. "Listen to this excellent account about the birth of a supreme rishi. O brahmanas! Through my
austerities, I got to know about my ancient birth. This was the seventh cycle of creation[The seventh manvantara.] that resulted from the
lotus. The great yogi, Narayana, is free from good and bad deeds. From his navel, he created the infinitely radiant
Brahma, his son. When he manifested himself, he spoke these words. 'You have been born from my navel. You are
the lord who will create different categories of subjects. O Brahma! Create many kinds of subjects, those who are
learned and those who are dumb.' Having been thus addressed, he was reluctant and anxiously thought about this
in his mind. He bowed down before Hari, the lord and god who is the granter of boons, and said, 'O lord of the
gods! I bow down before you. But where do I possess the strength to create subjects? O god! I do not possess the
requisite wisdom. You decide what is to be done next.' Having been thus addressed, the illustrious one who is the
creator of beings[This means Narayana.], disappeared. The intelligent one, the lord of the gods and supreme among intelligent ones, began to think. The lord Hari resorted to yoga and used this yoga to make the goddess of intelligence present herself
before him. Using the power of yoga, the undecaying lord then addressed the virtuous and powerful goddess of intelligence. 'O goddess of intelligence! Enter Brahma, so that the objective of creating the worlds become successful.' Having been thus instructed by the lord, the goddess of intelligence swiftly entered him. Hari saw that he was
united with intelligence and again spoke to him. 'Create different categories of subjects.' Saying this, the illustrious one vanished from there and in an instant, returned to his one state of divinity. He entered Prakriti and remained united with her. However, the intelligent one again began to think along the following lines. 'Brahma Parameshthi will create all the subjects-daityas, danavas, gandharvas and large numbers of rakshasas. The ascetic, the
earth,  will  become  burdened  with  those  who  have  been  born.  The  earth  will  be  full  of  many  strong  daityas,
danavas and rakshasas. They will engage in austerities and obtain excellent boons. Insolent at having obtained
these different kinds of boons, they will obstruct the large numbers of gods and the rishis, stores of austerities. It is
proper that I should devise a method for removing this burden. Therefore, in different forms, I will progressively
be born on earth. I will chastise the wicked and protect the virtuous. The virtuous and ascetic earth will then be
able to bear the burden. In the form of a serpent[As Shesha.], I will hold her up from below. Thus held up by me, she will
hold up the universe, with its mobile and immobile objects. So that I can save the earth, I will have incarnations.'

The illustrious Madhusudana thought in this way. 'I will create and manifest in different kinds of forms-boar,
man-lion, dwarf and human. I will slay the insolent enemies of the gods.' After this, the creator of the universe uttered the sound of 'Bho[Loosely translated as 'Hello'.]'. This sound echoed and Sarasvat manifested himself. This son, who manifested himself from the lord's speech, came to be known as Apantaratama[This means someone whose darkness (ignorance) has been destroyed.]. He was truthful, firm in his vows and knew
about the past, the present and the future. He bowed his head down before the original and immutable god, who
told him, 'O supreme among intelligent ones! Your task is the recounting of the Vedas and the sacred texts. O sage!
You should act in accordance with these instructions of mine.' In the manvantara known as Svayambhuva, he[Apantaratama.]
collated the Vedas. The illustrious Hari was pleased with his deeds, his tormenting himself with austerities, his
self-restraint and rituals.

'"The illustrious one said, 'O son! In each manvantara, you will thus establish the way of the worlds. O brahmana! You will not deviate and you will always be unassailable. The Kurus, known as the Bharatas, will be descended from you. They will be great-souled kings who are famous on earth. They will be born from you. But
there will be a dissension within the lineage. O supreme among brahmanas! Barring you, all the others will destroy
themselves. Then too, engaged in austerities, you will classify the Vedas. In that dark age, you will have a dark
complexion. You will know about different kinds of dharma and the diverse tasks that have to be performed. However, despite engaging in austerities, you will not be freed from attachment. Your son will be free from attachment
and will be like the paramatman. This will happen through the grace of Maheshvara and my words will not be falsified. Vasishtha is spoken of as the intelligent son who has been born from the grandfather's mental powers. He is
a store of austerities and his radiance transcends that of the sun. A maharshi named Parashara will be descended
from him and he will be extremely powerful. He will be supreme among those who are storehouses of the Vedas.
He will be a great ascetic and will immerse himself in austerities. He will be your father. There will be a maiden
who will dwell in her father's house. While still a virgin, she will have you as her son, through that rishi[The sage Parashara restored Satyavati's virginity.]. You
will know about the past, the present and the future, and all your doubts will be dispelled. The progress of thousands of yugas will pass before you. Through my instructions, you will witness all of them and be engaged in austerities. O sage! I am without beginning and without end. When thousands of yugas have passed, you will again
see me, with the chakra in my hand. O sage! All this will happen to you because of your meditations and my words
will not be falsified. Shanaishchara[Literally, the one who moves slowly, Shani or Saturn.] will be Surya's son and will be a great Manu. In that manvantara, because of
my grace, you will be superior to the saptarshis. O son! There is no doubt about this.'"

'Vyasa said, "The virtuous rishi, Sarasvata Apantaratama, heard these words spoken by the lord. Through the
favours of the god Harimedha, I am the one who was born as Apantaratama. I was born through Hari's commands.
I was again born as the famous one who is a descendant of the lineage of Vasishtha[That is, Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa himself.]. I have thus told you about
my earlier birth, whereby I was born through Narayana's favours and as Narayana's part. I performed extremely
great austerities. I performed terrible austerities. O best among intelligent ones! In ancient times, I performed excellent meditation. O sons! I have told you everything that you asked me about, about my earlier birth and my future. You are devoted to me and I am affectionate towards you."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'O king! I have thus told you how my preceptor was born earlier. Vyasa was cheerful
in his mind and when he was asked, this is what he said. Listen. O rajarshi! Know that there are many kinds of
knowledge-sankhya,  yoga,  pancharatra  and  pashupata.  The  great  rishi,  Kapila,  is  said  to  be  the  exponent  of
sankhya. The ancient Hiranyagarba, and no one else, is known as the exponent of yoga. Apantaratama is said to be
the teacher of the Vedas. Some speak of him as the rishi Prachinagarbha. Brahma's son, Shiva Shrikantha, the lord
of the demons and Uma's consort, is said to be the attentive exponent of the knowledge known as pashupata. The
illustrious one[Narayana.] himself is the exponent of all of pancharatra. O best among kings! All of these are considered as
the exponents of knowledge. O lord of the earth! All the sacred texts and all knowledge speaks of devotion to the
lord Narayana. Those who are enveloped in darkness do not comprehend this. There are learned ones who have
propounded the sacred texts. They said that there is nothing other than faith in the rishi Narayana. There is no
doubt that Hari always resides in everything. However, Madhava does not reside in those in whom doubt is strong
and who dispute. O king! There are those who know about pancharatra and follow it properly. They are singleminded in their devotion and merge into Hari. O king! Sankhya and yoga are eternal and so are all the Vedas. All
the rishis have said that the ancient Narayana pervades everything in the universe. Everything that is done in all the
worlds, good or bad, depends on him. All forms of knowledge flow from him. He is in the firmament, the sky, the
earth and the water.'
