'"Bhishma said, 'For the sake of Dhritarashtra's son, I have taken up this extremely large burden of the war, as
great as the ocean. This has been thought of for many years. The time has now arrived and the body hair stands up.
O one who has been born from a suta! I must not cause false dissension and that is the reason you are still alive.
Jamadagni's son, Rama, did not hurt me when he released great weapons[Parashurama. The story will be told in Section 60.]. What can you do? Righteous ones do
not approve of the praise of one's own might. O vile one! O defiler of your lineage! But I am telling you because
you have provoked me. All the kshatriya kings gathered at the svayamvara organized by the king of Kashi. I vanquished them on a single chariot and swiftly abducted the maidens. I alone repulsed thousands of such soldiers in
battle and vanquished them in battle. Once they confronted a hated man like you, a great destruction has arrived
before the Kurus. Be a man. Fight with Partha in battle, whom you seek to challenge. O extremely evil-minded
one! I will watch you escape from that fight.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Then the great-minded king who was Dhritarashtra's son spoke up. 'O Gangeya! Look towards
me. There is a great task that must be performed. You must first think about what is my supreme welfare. Both of
you[Presumably meaning Bhishma and Karna. But it could also mean Bhishma and Drona.] will perform great deeds for me. I wish to hear about the supreme rathas among the enemy. I wish to hear
about the atirathas and the leaders of masses of rathas. When it is morning and the night has passed, there will be a
war.'

'"Bhishma said, 'O king! I have recounted the numbers of your rathas and atirathas and also those who are half
of rathas. O king! O mighty-armed one! If you are curious, together with the lords of the earth, now listen to the
names among the Pandavas, to the strengths of the Pandavas and the number of their rathas. King Pandava, Kunti's
descendant, is a foremost ratha. O son[The word used is tata.]! There is no doubt that he will rage like a fire in battle. O Indra among
kings! Bhimasena has eight times the qualities of a ratha. That man is energetic and insolent and possesses the
strength of ten thousand elephants. Madri's two sons, bulls among men, are both rathas. They are like the Ashvins
in their beauty and energy. There is no doubt that they will remember their hardships and will roam around in the
front of the army, like Rudra. All these great-souled ones are tall and are like the trunks of shala trees. They are
more than a span taller than other men. All of these immensely strong sons of Pandu are capable of withstanding
lions. All of them have observed brahmacharya and are extreme ascetics. Those tigers among men are modest.
They are as proud of their strength as tigers. They are all superhuman in their speed, striking ability and combativeness. O bull among Bharatas! In their conquests, they have defeated all the kings of the earth. O Kourava! No
man can ever withstand their weapons, clubs or arrows, or string their bows and fix their arrows. Even when they
were children, all of them were superior to you in raising the club, shooting arrows, running, striking targets, eating and wrestling in the dust. Proud of their strength, like tigers, they will attack your army. They will destroy it in
battle. Try to avoid the encounter with them. One by one, they can kill all the kings of the earth. O Indra among
kings! You have yourself witnessed what occurred at the time of the rajasuya sacrifice. They will remember
Droupadi's molestation and the harsh words at the time of the gambling match. Like death, they will roam around
on the field of battle. Gudakesha's eyes are red and he has Vasudeva as an aide. O brave one! There is no ratha who
is equal to him in either army, nor among gods or earlier danavas, serpents, rakshasas and yakshas, not to speak of
men. I have not heard of any ratha who has been, or will be, as accomplished as the intelligent Partha. O great
king! Vasudeva is the charioteer and Dhananjaya is the warrior. The bow is the divine Gandiva and the horses have
the speed of the wind. The divine armour is impenetrable. The great quivers are inexhaustible. There are the
weapons of the great Indra, Rudra, Kubera, Yama and Varuna. His clubs are terrible to see. He has many weapons,
with the vajra as the foremost. There were thousands of danavas who lived in Hiranyapura. He slew them on a single chariot. Where is there a ratha like him? He is enraged. He is strong. Truth is his valour. That mighty-armed
one can destroy your army, while protecting his own. I can stand up to Dhananjaya, and so can the preceptor. O Indra among kings! But there is no third person, in either army. He will shower down arrows from his chariot, like
the cloud at the end of the summer season, when there is a mighty storm. The accomplished Kounteya has Vasudeva as an aide. He is young and skilled. Both of us are aged and exhausted.'"

'Sanjaya said, "When the kings heard the words of Bhishma, their hearts trembled. Their sturdy arms had golden bracelets. They were anointed with sandalwood paste. In their minds, they remembered the earlier speed and
strength of the Pandavyas, as if they could see them in front of their eyes."'
