'Duryodhana said, "Everything that Vidura has said about Krishna is true. Janardana is firmly devoted to the
Parthas and it is impossible to separate them. O Indra among kings! Therefore, the many different kinds of riches
you proposed to bestow on Janardana as hospitality should never be given to him. Though Keshava deserves all
that, this is not the time and the place. O king! Adhokshaja[Krishna.] will think that you are honouring him because of fear.
O lord of the earth! It is my certain conviction that anything that causes disrespect should never be undertaken by a
wise kshatriya. The divine and lotus-eyed Krishna deserves to be worshipped by the three worlds. I know everything about that. O lord! But one should not act so as to give him anything. That is the right course, now that war
has been decided on. War cannot become peace through pretence."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these words, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, addressed these words to
the king who was Vichitravirya's son. "Whether he is treated well or maltreated, Janardana will not be angered.
Though he is insulted, Keshava is incapable of insulting others. O mighty-armed one! Whatever he has mentally
decided as the right course of action cannot be thwarted by anyone through any means. Without any hesitation, we
should do what the mighty-armed one asks us to do. Using Vasudeva as our salvation, we must swiftly make peace
with the Pandavas. Janardana has dharma in his soul. He is certain to say that which is in conformity with dharma
and artha. You should address him in affectionate words, together with your relatives."

'Duryodhana said, "O king! This prosperity is mine alone and there is no circumstance under which I will share
it. O grandfather! I cannot bear to share it, and then continue to live. Listen to the great task that I have decided
upon. I will capture Janardana, the refuge of the Pandavas. When he is captured, the Vrishnis, the entire earth and
the Pandavas will submit. He will be here tomorrow morning. This must be accomplished so that Janardana does
not get to know. Tell me how this can be done, so that we do not confront any danger."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Dhritarashtra and his advisers heard these terrible words about causing violence to
Krishna, they were distressed and distracted. Dhritarashtra addressed these words to Duryodhana. "If you are the
protector of your subjects, do not speak in this way. This is not eternal dharma. Hrishikesha is a messenger and our
beloved relative. He intends no evil towards the Kouravas. How can it be right that he should be captured?"

'Bhishma said, "O Dhritarashtra! This extremely evil son of yours is the ultimate. Though he is urged by his
well-wishers, he chooses disaster over that which will ensure welfare. Because of his wicked followers, this
wicked one has deviated from the path. But you continue to follow him, without paying heed to the words of your
well-wishers. If this extremely evil son of yours and his advisers touch Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied, they
will be destroyed in an instant. I cannot bear to listen any more to the fruitless words of this wicked, cruel and evil-
minded one who has discarded dharma."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, the aged one, foremost among the Bharatas, was extremely enraged.
Bhishma, whose truth was his valour, arose and left the place.'
