Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! On seeing that Duryodhana had been brought down by Bhimasena in the encounter what did the Pandavas and the Srinjayas do?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! On seeing that Duryodhana had been brought down by Bhimasena in the encounter, like a crazy and wild elephant brought down by a lion in the forest, Krishna and the Pandavas were delighted. When the descendant of the Kuru lineage was brought down, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas waved their
upper garments around and roared like lions. It was as if the earth was no longer able to bear those cheerful ones.
Some brandished their bows. Others drew on their bowstrings. Others blew on their giant conch shells and sounded
drums. Some sported. Other enemies of yours laughed. The brave ones spoke these words to Bhimasena. 'You
have performed an extremely difficult and great task in the battle today. You have brought down the Indra among
Kouravas in the encounter, one who had undertaken great exertions with the club. This is like Indra killing Vritra
in a supreme encounter. These people think that your deed of slaying the enemy is like that. You have roamed
around in different ways and have executed all the circular motions. Who other than Vrikodara could have brought
down a brave one like Duryodhana? You have reached the end of the hostilities, something so difficult that no one
but you could have achieved that. No one else could have done that. O brave one! In the field of battle, you were
like a crazy elephant. It is through good fortune that you have kicked Duryodhana's head with your foot. O unblemished one! It is through good fortune that you have performed the wonderful task of drinking Duhshasana's
blood, like a lion against a buffalo. It is through good fortune and your deeds that you have placed your foot on the
heads of those who injured King Yudhishthira, one with dharma in his soul. O Bhima! It is through good fortune
that you have triumphed over the enemies and brought down Suyodhana. Your great fame will spread throughout
the earth. Bards praised Shakra's slaying of Vritra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that way, we are praising your slaying of the enemy. Since Duryodhana has been brought down, our body hair is standing up and we are
delighted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know that our joy has not diminished[This is probably a reference to the act of adharma not having diminished
the joy.].' The assembled bards
spoke in this way to Bhimasena.

' "The Panchalas and the Pandavas, tigers among men, were delighted and also spoke in a similar way. Madhusudana spoke to them. 'O lords of men! It is not proper to again kill an enemy who has been brought down. This
evil-minded one has already been killed. One should not address fierce words towards him. This wicked one has
been slain by destiny. Destiny has afflicted the shameless one. He was avaricious and had wicked aides. He followed the advice of those well-wishers. Several times, Vidura, Drona, Kripa, Gangeya and the Srinjayas asked him
to give the Pandus their paternal share. But he did not give it. The worst of men does not deserve to be called a
friend or a foe now. One should not waste words on someone who has become a piece of wood. O lords of the
earth! Ascend your chariots and let us leave swiftly. It is through good fortune that this evil-souled one has been
brought down, with his advisers, kin and allies.'

' "O lord of the earth! Hearing Krishna's censorious words, King Duryodhana was overcome by intolerance and
tried to rise. He used his two arms to support himself on the ground. He frowned and glanced towards Vasudeva. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! With his body half raised, the king's form was like that of an angry and virulent
serpent, with a severed tail. He paid no attention to the terrible pain that was about to take away his life. Duryodhana spoke these harsh words to Vasudeva. 'You are the son of Kamsa's slave and you have no shame[Krishna was the son of Vasudeva. Vasudeva married Devaki, Kamsa's
(alternatively Kansa) sister. Vasudeva was never Kamsa's slave or servant, but was imprisoned by him. Eventually, Krishna killed Kamsa.]. In this
encounter with the clubs, I have been brought down through adharma. Bhima falsified the injunctions of the sacred
texts and shattered my thighs. Do you think I do not know what you told Arjuna? You have slaughtered thousands
of kings through unfair means. You have used many crooked means. But you suffer no shame or abhorrence on account of that. From one day to another, you have caused a great carnage of brave ones. Placing Shikhandi at the
forefront, you brought down the grandfather. O evil-minded one! You caused an elephant named Ashvatthama to
be killed and made the preceptor lay down his weapons. Do you think that this is not known to me? When that
valiant one was cruelly brought down by Dhrishtadyumna, you witnessed it. But you did not restrain him. A
javelin was obtained[By Karna, from Indra and for Arjuna's destruction.] for the destruction of Pandu's son. You wasted it on Ghatotkacha. Is there anyone more
wicked than you? The powerful Bhurishrava's arms were severed and he was ready to give up his life. When Shini's evil-souled descendant[Satyaki.] killed him, you were behind that act. Karna performed the excellent deed of triumphing over Partha. But you caused Ashvasena, the son of the king of the serpents, to be countered. In the battle,
Karna's wheel was submerged in the ground. He was defeated and overtaken by a hardship. That foremost among
men was trying to extricate it and you had him killed. Had you fought me, Karna, Bhishma and Drona through fair
means, it is certain that you would not have been victorious. However, you adopted ignoble and deceitful methods.
There were many kings who followed their own dharma. But you caused them to follow you and thus to be killed.'

' "Vasudeva replied, 'O Gandhari's son! You have been brought down, with your brothers, sons, relatives, followers and well-wishers. That is because you resorted to a wicked path. It is because of your evil deeds that the
brave Bhishma and Drona have been brought down. It is because he followed your conduct that Karna has been
slain in the battle. O stupid one! Though I asked you, you did not give the Pandavas half of your kingdom, their
paternal share. This is because of your avarice and Shakuni's advice. You gave poison to Bhimasena. O evil-minded one! You tried to burn down all the Pandavas, and their mother, in the house of lac. Yajnaseni was in her season.
Despite this, at the time of the gambling match, she was oppressed in the assembly hall. O shameless one! That is
the reason someone like you should be killed. The one who follows dharma[Yudhishthira.] was unskilled and Soubala was
knowledgeable about the heart of dice. He was defeated through deceit. For that reason, you should be slain in the
battle. The wicked Jayadratha afflicted Krishna[Krishnaa, that is, Droupadi. This has been described in Section 42 (Volume 3).] in the forest, in Trinabindu's hermitage, when they[The Pandavas.] had gone
out on a hunt. Abhimanyu was a child and though he was single-handed, many fought him in the battle. O evil
one! He was killed because of your deeds. For that reason, you should be slain in this battle.'

' "Duryodhana said, 'I have studied and given the ordained gifts. I have ruled the earth, up to the frontiers of the
ocean. I have placed my foot on the heads of enemies. Who is as fortunate as I am? It is through good fortune that
I have seen my kshatriya relatives established in their own dharma. Even if I am slain, who can be more fortunate
than I am? There are human objects of pleasure that gods deserve. These are difficult for kings to obtain. But I
have obtained that supreme prosperity. Who can be more fortunate than I am? O unblemished one! I will go to
heaven, with my well-wishers and my relatives. Your objectives are yet unaccomplished. You will sorrow here.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the king of the Kurus concluded these words, a large
shower of flowers, with auspicious fragrances, rained down. Gandharvas and large numbers of apsaras played on
musical instruments. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Siddhas uttered words of praise. Fragrant, delicate and
pleasant winds began to blow, mixed with sacred scents. The sky became beautiful and clear, with the complexion
of lapis lazuli. On seeing these wonderful sights, they[The Pandavas.], with Vasudeva at the forefront, were ashamed and honoured Duryodhana. On hearing that Bhishma, Drona, Karna and Bhurishrava had been slain through adharma, they
grieved and wept in sorrow. The Pandavas were distressed and immersed in thought. On seeing this, Krishna spoke
these words, in a voice that rumbled like clouds and drums. 'All of them were swift in the use of weapons and
were maharathas. In a fair fight, even if we fought bravely, we were incapable of defeating them in the battle. That
is the reason I thought of means to slay those lords of men. Otherwise, the Pandaveyas would never have obtained
victory. Those four great-souled ones were atirathas on earth[An atiratha is a great warrior, superior to a maharatha. The four in question are Bhishma, Drona, Karna and Bhurishrava.]. Following dharma, even the guardians of the
world themselves would not have been able to kill them. Even when he is exhausted, Dhritarashtra's son, with the
club in his hand, is incapable of being killed through the means of dharma, even by Yama with a staff in his hand.
You should not sorrow that the king has been slain in this way. When enemies are many and numerous, they have
to be killed through falsehood and other means. Earlier, this was the path followed by the gods, when they killed
the asuras. That good route that they followed is one which everyone can follow. We have accomplished our objective. It is evening. We should go to our abodes. Let all the kings, the horses, the elephants and the chariots, rest.'

On hearing Vasudeva's words, the Pandavas and the Panchalas became extremely cheerful and roared like a pride
of lions. They blew on their conch shells and Madhava blew on Panchajanya. On seeing that Duryodhana had been
brought down, the bulls among men were delighted." '
