Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing that bull among men ascend the chariot in the form of a eunuch and head for the
shami tree, after having made Uttara ascend the chariot, the supreme charioteers among the Kurus, with Bhishma
and Drona at the front, were all agitated in their minds out of fear of Dhananjaya. On seeing them lose their endeavour and on witnessing extraordinary omens, the preceptor Bharadvaja[Drona.], supreme among wielders of weapons,
said, "Violent and turbulent winds are blowing, rough and harsh in tone. The sky is covered in a darkness that has
the complexion of ashes. The clouds are extraordinary to look at, with a rough hue. Many weapons are coming out
of their sheaths. Jackals are lamenting and the directions are ablaze with a terrible light. The horses are shedding
tears. The flags are fluttering, though there is nothing to move them. Since many such portents can be seen, be
steadfast, because a great battle must be near. Protect yourselves and arrange yourselves in battle formations. Wait
for a slaughter and protect the wealth of cattle. This is a brave and mighty archer, supreme among those who are
skilled in all weapons. There is no doubt that it is Partha who has arrived in the form of a eunuch. This is the valorous Partha, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies. He will not refrain from battle, even against masses of Maruts[Maruts are gods of the wind and Indra's companions.].
The brave one suffered difficulties in the forest and was trained by Vasava[Indra.]. He is intolerant and there is no doubt
that he will do battle. O Kouravas! I do not see a warrior who is capable of repulsing him. It is said that Partha satisfied Mahadeva[Shiva. The story of this encounter has been told in Section 31 (Volume 2).] himself in a battle." Karna replied, "You always belittle us by speaking about Phalguna's qualities. But Arjuna isn't worth one kala[Kala means a small part or fraction. In addition, kala is a digit of the moon and sixteen kalas make up the entirety. Therefore, Arjuna is a small part of Karna and Duryodhana and specifically, one-sixteenth of either of them.] of me or Duryodhana." Duryodhana said, "O Radheya[Radha's son, Karna's name.]! If it is Partha, my
task will be accomplished. Once recognized, they will have to roam again for another twelve years. Or if it is some
other man in the form of a eunuch, I will soon bring him down to ground with extremely sharp arrows." When
Dhritarashtra's son, scorcher of enemies, spoke these words, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Drona's son honoured his
manliness.'
