'Bhima replied, "I am Pandava Bhimasena. I am next in birth to Dharma's son[Yudhishthira.]. O rakshasas! I have come with
my brothers to the extensive Badari. There, Panchali saw the supreme sougandhika. The wind carried it from here
and she immediately wanted many more. O those who roam in the night! Know that I have come here to gather
flowers, to do that which brings pleasure to the one with the unblemished limbs, my wife in accordance with
dharma."

'The rakshasas said, "O bull among men! This is Kubera's beloved pleasure garden. One who is subject to the
laws of mortal earth cannot sport here. O Vrikodara! Devarshis, yakshas and gods have to seek the permission of
the lord of the yakshas before they can drink or amuse themselves here. O Pandava! So do the gandharvas and the
apsaras before sporting here. If an evil-minded one sports here against these rules, insulting the lord of riches, there
is no doubt that he will meet with destruction. Ignoring him, you wish to take these lotuses away by force. Why do
you then describe yourself as Dharmaraja's brother?"

'Bhima replied, "O rakshasas! I do not see the lord of riches anywhere near. Even if I were to see the great king,
I would not trouble him by asking. It is the eternal dharma that kings should not beg. I do not wish to deviate from
the dharma of kshatriyas by even a trifle. This beautiful lotus pond has been created from mountainous water
springs. It is not part of the abode of the great-souled Kubera. It belongs equally to all beings, just as it does to
Vaishravana. Since this is the state of affairs, who should ask whom for permission?"'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this to all the rakshasas, the powerful Bhimasena plunged in. All the rakshasas tried to restrain him, asking him to desist. They angrily abused him from all directions. But not paying any
attention to the rakshasas, the one who was terrible in valour plunged in. All of them tried to restrain the immensely energetic one. "Grasp him." "Bind him." "Slash him." "We will cook and feed on Bhimasena." Angrily uttering
such words, they raised their arms and distending their eyes, swiftly rushed at him. He grasped his giant club, inlaid with gold, and like Yama's staff. He grasped it and swiftly hurled himself at them, shouting, "Stay there! Stay
there!" The extremely terrible krodhavashas suddenly rushed at him with great force. They had spears, battleaxes
and other weapons. Desiring to kill him, they encircled Bhima in terrible fashion. But the powerful one was born
in Kunti's womb from the wind. He was swift and brave and the destroyer of his enemies. He was always devoted
to truth and dharma. In valour, he was incapable of being vanquished by any foe. The great-souled one used many
techniques. He destroyed the weapons of his enemies. On the banks of that pond, the brave one slew hundreds of
them, including those who were the foremost. On seeing his valour and strength, the strength of his knowledge and
the strength of his arms and unable to withstand him, despite their numbers, they suddenly fled in all directions, the
foremost ones having been slain. They were destroyed and crushed, and bereft of their senses, took to the sky.
Crushed by Bhima, the krodhavashas were shattered and ran away, towards the peak of Kailasa.

'Having thus vanquished hordes of daityas and danavas in battle, like Shakra, the one who was victorious over
his enemies again plunged into the pond and collected lotuses, in accordance with his desires. Having drunk the
water, which was like amrita, his valour and energy were completely restored. He plucked and gathered sougandhika lotuses, with a supreme fragrance. The krodhavashas had been overcome with Bhima's strength. They went to
the lord of riches and extremely frightened, told him about Bhima's valour and strength in battle. Having heard
their words, the god laughed and told the rakshasas, "Let Bhima take as many lotuses as he wishes for Krishna. I
know the reason." Having taken their leave of the lord of riches and having controlled their anger, they returned to
the foremost among the Kurus. They saw Bhima alone in that pond full of lotuses, sporting happily.'
