'"Sudeva said, 'The king of Vidarbha has dharma in his soul. His name is Bhima and his valour is terrible. This is
his fortunate daughter, famous by the name of Damayanti. The king of the nishadhas has the name of Nala and he
is the son of Virasena. This fortunate one is the wife of the wise Punyashloka. In a game of dice, that lord of the
earth was robbed of his kingdom by his brother. He went away with Damayanti, without anyone knowing where
they had gone. We have been travelling the entire earth in search of Damayanti. I finally discovered the lady in
your son's house. No other woman is known to have a beauty like hers. Between the eyebrows of this dark one
there is a natural mark[A birthmark. Alternatively, a mole.]. It is shaped like a lotus and I have seen it before. But it has disappeared now. It is covered in dirt, like the moon covered by white clouds. This mark of prosperity was given to her by the creator. It can
be faintly seen now, like the covered sliver of a moon on the first day of the lunar fortnight. But though her body is
covered with dirt, her beauty has not been destroyed. Though she has not washed herself, it shines forth like gold.
This lady, this goddess, was identified by me from her body and from that mark, like a hidden fire can be detected
from its heat.'"

'Brihadashva said, "O lord of the earth! When Sunanda heard these words of Sudeva, she cleaned the dirt that
covered the mark. Having been cleansed of the dirt, Damayanti's mark became visible, like the moon appears in
the clear sky. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the mark, Sunanda and the king's mother wept. They
embraced her and stood there for some time. Shedding tears, the king's mother said in a soft voice, 'From this
mark I know that you are my sister's daughter. O beautiful one! Your mother and I are the daughters of the great-
souled Sudamna, the king of Dasharna. She was given to King Bhima and I was again given to Virabahu. I saw
you being born, in my father's house in Dasharna. O beautiful one! This house of mine is like your father's house.
O Damayanti! All my riches are like yours.' O lord of the earth! On hearing these words, Damayanti's mind rejoiced. She showed her respects to her mother's sister and spoke these words, 'Even though I was unknown, I lived
here happily. I received all the objects of my desire and was always protected by you. There is no doubt that my
stay here will now be happier still. O mother! But I have been away from home for a long time. Please give me
permission to leave. My children have been taken there and the young ones are living there. They must be sorrowful because they are without their father and without me. How are they? I wish to go to Vidarbha. If you wish to do
something that brings me pleasure, please give instructions that transport arrangements are made swiftly.' O king!
On hearing these words, her mother's sister happily agreed. With her son's consent, the king's mother arranged for
a handsome vehicle for her, carried by men[It was a palanquin.]. It was guarded by a large force. O best of the Bharata lineage! It
was stocked with plenty of food, drink and garments.

'"Then, after a short while, the beautiful one arrived in Vidarbha and all her relatives happily welcomed her,
showing her homage. She saw that her relatives and her children were well, and so were her mother, her father and
all her friends. O lord of the earth! The famous one, the fortunate Damayanti, worshipped the gods and the brahmanas in accordance with the best of rites. The king was delighted on seeing his daughter. He satisfied Sudeva by
giving him a thousand cows, a lot of riches and a village. O king! The beautiful lady spent the night in her father's
house. When she had rested, she spoke to her mother in these words."'
