'Uttara said, "I wield a firm bow and I will today follow the footprints of the cattle, but only if someone skilled in
horses becomes my charioteer. But I do not know of any man who can drive me. Swiftly look for a charioteer who
can drive me out. My charioteer was killed in the great battle that lasted for twenty-eight nights, if not for an entire
month. As soon as I find another man who is skilled in knowledge of horses, I will quickly ride out, with my giant
standard raised. I will enter the ranks of the enemy army, with its many elephants, horses and chariots. The Kurus
will be defeated through the valour of my weapons and power and I will bring back the animals. In battle, I will
terrify Duryodhana, Shantanu's son[Bhishma.], Vaikartana Karna, Kripa, Drona and his son[Ashvatthama.] and all the other great archers
who have assembled, like the wielder of the vajra against the danavas. I will bring back the animals in an instant.
Finding that the kingdom is deserted, the Kurus are taking away the riches of cattle. What can I possibly do if I am
not there? Today, the assembled Kurus will witness my valour. 'Is it Partha Arjuna himself who is vanquishing
us[That is what the Kurus will say.]?'"'
Vaishampayana said, 'He repeatedly spoke these words in the presence of the women and Panchali could not
tolerate his reference to Bibhatsu[The one who terrifies, one of Arjuna's names.]. In the midst of the women, the ascetic one approached him. With a bashful expression, she softly spoke these words. "This extremely handsome youth is known by the name of Brihannada and
resembles a gigantic elephant. He has been Partha's charioteer. He was the great-souled one's disciple and was not
inferior to him in the use of the bow. O brave one! I have seen him earlier, when I dwelt with the Pandavas. When
the conflagration of the fire burnt down the great Khandava[The story has been recounted in Section 19 (Volume 2).], it is he who drove Arjuna's supreme steeds. With
him as charioteer, Partha conquered all the beings in Khandavaprastha. There is no other charioteer like him. O
brave one! Your maiden sister has beautiful hips and there is no doubt that he will follow her orders. If he becomes
your charioteer, there is no doubt that you will vanquish all the Kurus and return swiftly with the cattle." On being
thus addressed by Sairandhri, he spoke to his sister. "O one with the unblemished limbs! Go and bring Brihannada
here." Thus sent by her brother, she quickly went to the dancing hall where the mighty-armed Pandava lived, hidden in his disguise.'
