'Yarkandeya said, "O brave one! O conqueror of enemy cities! Listen to what Sarasvati chanted, when she was
asked by the wise sage Tarkshya about this matter. Tarkshya asked, 'O fortunate one! What is the best thing for a
man here[Here means, on this earth.]? What should he do so that he does not deviate from his own dharma? O one who is beautiful in all
her limbs! Instruct me. Instructed by you, I will not stray from my own dharma. How should one offer oblations
into the fire? How should one worship and when? How does one ensure dharma is not destroyed? O fortunate one!
Tell me all this, so that I can roam in this world, free from passion.' She was thus lovingly questioned by the one
who desired to learn. He was supreme in his intelligence.

'"Sarasvati spoke to brahmana Tarkshya words that were full of dharma, the bringer of welfare. Sarasvati said,
'He who knows the brahman in every region, is always devoted to studying and is pure and calm, goes to the foremost among the cities of the gods, and finds bliss with the immortals. There are many beautiful and large lakes
there, bereft of sorrow. They are extremely sacred and full of flowers. They are without mud and full of fish. There
are golden lotuses. These are excellent tirthas. The performers of sacred deeds find glory and happiness on those
banks, served by apsaras, who wear fragrant scents and are adorned with ornaments, their complexions like that of
gold. Those who donate cattle attain the supreme world. By donating bulls, one roams in the world of the sun. By
giving garments, one goes to the world of the moon. By giving gold, one attains the immortals. If one gives away a
good cow that is easily milked and gives birth to fine calves, one that does not stray, one lives for as many years in
heaven, as there are countable body hairs on his person. One who donates a strong, young and skilled bull that has
infinite strength, and is capable of carrying burdens and drawing a plough, obtains the world that is obtained by donating ten cows. O Tarkshya! One who offers oblations into the fire for seven years, is good in vows and righteous
in conduct, through one's deeds, purifies seven generations of forefathers and descendants.'

'"Tarkshya asked, 'O beautiful one! I am asking you. Please tell me. What is the ancient vow of agnihotra? Instructed by you, I will learn about the ancient vow of agnihotra.' Sarasvati replied, 'One who is impure, one whose
hands have not been washed, one who does not know about the brahman and one who is not wise, cannot make
such offerings. Even when hungry, the gods desire purity. They do not accept offerings from those who lack devotion. One who is not a shrotriya[A shrotriya is a brahmana learned in the sacred texts, specifically the Vedas.] should not be employed to render oblations to the gods. Such others will be like
throwing the oblations away. O Tarkshya! I maintain that no one other than a shrotriya is entitled to offer agnihotra. Those who devotedly offer oblations into the fire, true in their vows, partaking only of leftover food[Food left over after offerings to gods, ancestors, brahmanas and guests.], attain
the pure and fragrant world of cows[Goloka, Krishna's world.]. They see the supreme and true god.' Tarkshya asked, 'O beautiful one! O
goddess! You are wisdom. You are extremely fortunate. You are immersed in intelligence. You are the fruits of
deeds. You are born in the body, but you are divine in feelings. I am asking you. Who are you?' Sarasvati replied,
'I have arisen from the agnihotra, to remove doubts in the minds of the brahmana rishis. I felt happy at having met
you. Therefore, I have explained these things to you exactly and accurately.' Tarkshya said, 'There is no one who
is your equal. You shine as radiantly as Shri[Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth.]. Your divine form is extremely beautiful. O fortunate one! You are
the goddess of divine wisdom.' Sarasvati replied, 'O foremost among bipeds! I thrive on the best of sacrificial offerings that the learned ones offer. I prosper on those oblations. O brahmana! That is how I become beautiful. O
learned one! Whatever objects are rendered in offerings, made of wood or iron or originating in the earth, know
that they help attain celestial beauty and wisdom.' Tarkshya said, 'This ensures supreme welfare. That is the reason resolute sages resort to this. Tell me about the supreme bliss that comes from supreme salvation, into which,
the wise ones enter.' Sarasvati replied, 'Those who are supremely learned in the Vedas achieve that. It is the
supreme and ancient soul. Through studying, donations, vows and sacred yoga, those who are rich in austerities are
freed, devoid of sorrow. In the midst, there is a cane, holy and fragrant. It has a thousand pure and radiant branches[This is a metaphor for the sacrifice and its offerings.]. The rivers stream forth from its roots, with waters that are extremely sacred and honeyed. The great rivers
flow from branch to branch like grains of sand, with grain, cakes, meat and herbs, with the mud of payasa[Payasa is a sweet dish made from milk and rice.]. The
fire is the mouth and the gods, together with Indra and the Maruts, come to the sacrifice and are worshipped. O
sage! That is the supreme spot.'"'
