'Sanjaya said, "According to Partha's wishes, Krishna urged the horses, which were as swift as thought, white and
caparisoned in gold, and drove them towards Drona's army. While that best of the Kurus departed to save those on
his side who were tormented by Drona, Susharma and his brothers followed him from the rear, wishing to do battle. The unvanquished Jaya, possessor of the white horses, spoke to Krishna. 'O Achyuta! Susharma and his brothers are challenging me. O destroyer of enemies! Our soldiers are being shattered towards the north. Because of the
samshaptakas, I am again caught in two minds now. Should I kill the samshaptakas or should I protect our soldiers
who are afflicted by the enemy? Know that this is what I am thinking of. What is more beneficial for me?' Having
been thus addressed, Dasharha reversed the chariot and took Pandava to the spot where the lord of Trigarta was
challenging him. Arjuna pierced Susharma with seven swift arrows and brought down his standard and bow with a
razor-sharp arrow. Partha then used six iron arrows to swiftly send the brother of the lord of Trigarta, his horses
and his charioteer to Yama's abode. At this, Susharma grasped an iron javelin that was like a serpent and hurled
this towards him, also throwing a spear at Vasudeva. Arjuna used three arrows to shatter the javelin and another
three to fragment the spear. He then confounded Susharma with his storm of arrows and forced him to retreat. O
king! Like Vasava pouring down rain, he showered down many fierce arrows on your soldiers and there was no
one who could oppose him. Dhananjaya advanced, slaying all the maharatha Kouravas with his arrows, like a fire
consuming dry wood. Like beings who cannot bear the touch of fire, no one was capable of withstanding the force
of Kunti's intelligent son.

'"O king! Pandava showered down arrows on the assembled army, and like Suparna[Garuda.] swooping down, approached Pragjyotisha. Jishnu held the bow which was like the granter of boons to virtuous Bharatas and was the
bringer of tears to enemies in battle. O king! Because of your son's deceit in gambling with the dice, Arjuna
grasped the bow that would destroy kshatriyas. O great king! Thus it was that your army was agitated by Partha,
like a boat that is shattered when it strikes a mountain. Ten thousand archers advanced. Those angry and brave
ones had made up their minds to do battle, regardless of victory or defeat. Their hearts were devoid of fear. Headed
towards calamity, they obstructed the ratha's path. Partha was capable of handling a grave burden and could withstand all burdens in battle. He was like an enraged elephant with rent temples that is sixty years of age and is let
loose on a forest of lotuses, destroying it. In that fashion, Partha shattered your army. When the soldiers were thus
being crushed, King Bhagadatta suddenly attacked Dhananjaya on that elephant. The tiger among men remained
on his chariot and received him. A tumultuous encounter commenced between the chariot and the elephant, when
the two brave ones, Bhagadatta and Dhananjaya, fought each other. The elephant was like a cloud and Lord Bhagadatta, who was like Indra, showered down arrows on Dhananjaya. Vasava's son repulsed that shower of arrows released by the valiant Bhagadatta with his own shower of arrows and sliced them down before they could reach
him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Pragjyotisha also repulsed that shower of arrows and tried to kill
the mighty-armed Partha and Krishna with his arrows. Those two were enveloped with a giant shower of arrows
and he urged the elephant on, to kill Achyuta and Partha. On seeing that the elephant was descending, like angry
Death, Janardana quickly wheeled the chariot, so that it[The elephant.] remained on the left. Dhananjaya thus got an opportunity to slay the mighty elephant and its rider. But remembering his dharma, he did not do this[The rules of fair combat required one to fight from the front, not the sides or the rear.]. O venerable one!
That elephant descended on elephants, chariots and horses and dispatched them to the world of the dead. At this,
Dhananjaya was enraged."'
