Janamejaya asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! After having granted the boon to Utanka, what did the immensely illustrious and mighty-armed Govinda do next?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Having granted the boon to Utanka, Govinda left for Dvaraka on extremely swift and
large horses, accompanied by Satyaki. Having passed over lakes, rivers and many kinds of forests, he arrived at the
beautiful city of Dvaravati. O great king! When Pundarikaksha reached, followed by Yuyudhana, it was time for
the festival of Raivataka. The mountain was ornamented in many colourful ways[Raivataka was the name of the mountain in Dvaraka and the festival took place near the mountain.]. O bull among men! All the
roads were paved with gold. The summit of the great mountain was decorated with extremely pleasant and golden
garlands and so were the houses. There were kalpavrikshas everywhere[A kalpavriksha is a tree that grants every object of desire. These are found in heaven. Here, it simply means that
the trees were beautifully decorated.]. There were golden lamps on the trees
and it was a beautiful sight. Even the caves and the waterfalls shone, as if it was day. There were colourful flags,
decorated with bells, in every direction. There were the melodious notes of men and women singing. It was beautiful to see, like Meru inhabited by large numbers of sages. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The women and
the men were cheerful and intoxicated. They sang on that Indra among mountains and the sound seemed to touch
heaven. The place was full of these excited people, mad with delight and intoxicated. Extremely beautiful and
cheerful sounds could be heard. There were excellent shops and stalls, filled with food that could be tasted and
swallowed. There were garments and garlands. There was the sound of veenas, flutes and drums. Food that could
be tasted and swallowed was mixed with sura and maireya[Since the text mentions these two different types of liquor, we have retained the names.]. Gifts were incessantly offered to the distressed, the
blind and the miserable. Because of these supremely beneficial acts, the giant mountain seemed to be greater still.
O brave one! Many auspicious abodes had been erected there and the virtuous ones resided there. Thus did the
brave ones from the Vrishni lineage enjoy the festival of Raivataka. Surrounded by all these residences, the mountain looked like the world of the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On Krishna's arrival, that king of mountains looked like Shakra's residence. Honoured, Govinda entered an auspicious residence and Satyaki also went to
his own home. Cheerful, he[Krishna.] entered after a long period of residence away from home. Like Vasava among the
danavas, he had performed many extremely difficult deeds. The Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas came forward to
meet the great-souled Varshneya, like the gods meeting Shatakratu. The intelligent one honoured them and asked
about their welfare. Delighted, he greeted his father and his mother. The mighty-armed one was embraced and
comforted by them. Surrounded by all the Vrishnis, he then sat down. When the greatly energetic one had washed
his feet and had rested, Krishna was asked by his father and told him about the great battle.'
