'Yudhishthira asked, "Mandhata was a tiger among kings, famous in the three worlds. O great brahmana! How was
that supreme of kings, the son of Yuvanashva, born? How did that infinitely radiant one attain the supreme objective? The three worlds were as much under his control as under the great-souled Vishnu. I wish to hear about the
character of that wise one. He was as resplendent as Shakra. How did he obtain the name of Mandhata? How was
the one with unmatched valour born? You are a skilled one[In the art of telling stories.]."
'Lomasha said, "O king! Listen attentively to how that great-souled king came to obtain the name of Mandhata,
recounted in the worlds. There was a lord of the earth named Yuvanashva, in the lineage of Ikshvaku. The protector of the earth performed many sacrifices and gave away a lot of stipends. The foremost among those who uphold
dharma performed one thousand horse sacrifices and many other sacrifices, in which, there were many stipends.
But the rajarshi, great in his soul and firm in his vows, had no sons. He entrusted the kingdom to his ministers and
lived permanently in the forest. Contemplating his own soul, he engaged in the rules laid down in the sacred texts.

'"Once, his heart was dry with thirst and he entered Bhrigu's hermitage. O Indra among kings! On that night, the
great-souled maharshi, who was Bhrigu's son, performed a sacrifice so that Soudyumni[Another name for Yuvanashva.] might obtain a son.
Mantras were recited over water and a large pot was filled with this. O Indra among kings! It had been established
there earlier, so that his wife might drink it and give birth to a son who was Shakra's equal. The maharshis had
placed the pot on the altar. Exhausted as a result of staying up at night, they had gone to sleep. Soudyumni passed
them. The king's throat was parched from thirst and he was desperate for a drink. He was exhausted. On entering
the hermitage, he asked for a drink. Because he was tired, his throat was dry and no one heard him. His tone was
like a bird's notes. On seeing the pot filled with water, the king swiftly ran towards it. Having drunk the cold water,
the intelligent king's thirst was quenched and he was happy. He threw the rest of the water away and slept.

'"Later, the rishis awoke, along with the lord of men. On seeing that the pot was empty of water, all of them assembled together and asked, 'Who has done this?' Yuvanashva truthfully replied, 'It was I.' The illustrious Bhargava then said, 'This was not right. After austerities, this water had been collected for the sake of your son. O rajarshi! I performed terrible austerities in the name of the brahman, so that you might have an immensely strong and
valorous son and passed it on[Into the water.]. He would have been immensely strong and immensely valorous and would have
been full of the power of austerities. His valour would have been such that he would even have sent Shakra to
Yama's abode. O king! These were the rituals through which the water had been prepared by me. O king! Your
drinking the water today is not an act that should have been done. But it is now impossible to reverse the deed that
has been done. What you have done must certainly have been decreed by destiny. Because you were thirsty, you
drank water that had been sanctified with rites and mantras. O great king! That water was infused with my power
and austerities. Therefore, you will yourself give birth to a son with these characteristics. We will perform the rites
and sacrifices for you so that this supremely extraordinary event may occur and a valorous son, the equal of
Shakra, is born.' Then one hundred years passed. The left side of the great-souled king was rent asunder and a son
emerged, extremely energetic like the sun. But Yuvanashva, the lord of men, did not die and this was certainly
extraordinary.

'"The immensely energetic Shakra came there to see him and Shakra inserted his own forefinger into the child's
mouth. The wielder of the vajra said, 'He will suck me.' Then Indra and the other gods named him Mandhata[Derived from mam dhata, 'the nurse will be me'.].
O protector of the earth! Having sucked the forefinger offered by Shakra, the child grew to thirteen cubits[The word used is kishku. Kishku is the length of a forearm, that is, one cubit.]. O
great king! The knowledge of the Vedas, together with that of dhanurveda and that of all the divine weapons, appeared before this lord at the instant that he thought about them. The bow named Ajagava, arrows made of horn
and impenetrable armour instantly followed his commands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Maghavan
Shakra himself instated him. He conquered the three worlds with his dharma, like Vishnu in his valour[This is a reference to Vishnu's vamana (dwarf) avatara, where Vishnu covered the three worlds in his three
strides.]. The
great-souled one's realm[Chakra. An emperor is known as chakravarti.] was unobstructed. Gems flowed to the rajarshi of their own accord. O lord of the
earth! This earth, with all its riches, belonged to him. He performed many varied sacrifices and gave away abundant stipends. O king! Having erected many sanctuaries in accordance and acquired abundant dharma, that immensely energetic and greatly radiant one obtained half of Shakra's kingdom. In a single day, the wise one, always
with dharma, brought the entire earth, with all its habitations and stores of jewels, under his control. O great king!
The four corners of the earth are covered with his sacrificial grounds, where he performed sacrifices with donations. There is no spot that was not covered. O great king! It is said that the great-souled one gave brahmanas ten
thousand padmas[A padma is one thousand billion, that is, one trillion.] of cattle. When there was a drought for twelve years, the great-souled one made it rain, so
that the crops might grow, while the one with the vajra in his hand[Indra. Indra showers down rain.], looked on. The great king of Gandhara was
born in the lunar dynasty. But with a roar like that of the giant clouds, he killed him with his sharp arrows[Mandhata killed the king of Gandhara.]. O
king! The great-souled one subjugated the four types of beings. Through his austerities and energy, he established
the worlds. This is the place where he, as radiant as the sun, offered sacrifices to the gods. Behold this sacred region, in the middle of Kurukshetra. O protector of the earth! I have narrated to you everything about the great character of Mandhata and his wonderful birth, about which you had asked me."'
