Vaishampayana said, 'O lord of the earth! When Kichaka and his younger brothers were killed, people thought
about how oppressive they had been and were amazed. There was speculation in the city and the countryside.

"Kichaka was loved by the king because of his valour and great spirit. The evil-minded one oppressed men and
molested their wives. It is certain that the gandharvas have killed the evil-souled and wicked one." O great king! In
country after country, people talked about Kichaka, who had been the destroyer of enemy armies and had been
invincible.

'Dhritarashtra's son had employed spies. They searched many villages, kingdoms and cities. Accomplishing the
task that they had been assigned, they inspected countries and returned anxiously to Nagapura[Naga means elephant and Nagapura is another name for Hastinapura. They were anxious because they hadn't
been able to find the Pandavas.]. They saw King
Kouravya, Dhritarashtra's son, together with Drona, Karna, Kripa and the great-souled Bhishma. They told Duryodhana, who was seated in the assembly hall with his brothers and the maharathas from Trigarta[The Trigarta kingdom allied itself with the Kouravas and against the Pandavas. There were actually two Trigarta
kingdoms, one towards the north and the other towards the west.]. "O Indra among
men! Always observing great care, we searched for the Pandavas in that great forest. It is deserted and is infested
with wild animals. It is covered with many different kinds of trees, creepers and a large number of vines, shrouded
with various thickets. The Parthas are extremely firm in their valour and we have not been able to find out where
they have gone. We searched for their footsteps along every possible road, on mountain peaks, summits, many
countries, in inhabited regions, mountainous villages and cities. O Indra among men! We have searched in many
directions, but have not been able to find the Pandavas. O fortunate one! O bull among men! They have completely
disappeared. O supreme among charioteers! O Indra among men! While we searched for those warriors, we followed their charioteers for some time. We enquired in the right fashion and have got to know everything. O
scorcher of enemies! The charioteers reached Dvaravati without the Parthas. O king! The Pandavas are not there,
nor Krishna, devoted to her husbands. They have completely vanished. Homage to thee! O bull among the Bharata
lineage! We do not know the destinations or the residences of those great-souled ones. Nor do we know about the
conduct or the deeds of the Pandavas. O Indra among men! O lord of the earth! Instruct us. While searching for the
Pandavas, what will we do next? But listen to our pleasant words, which will ensure your fortune and welfare. O
king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The great-souled Kichaka, King Matsya's suta, who defeated the Trigartas with a large army, has been brought down and killed in the night by invisible gandharvas. O one without decay! The evil-souled one and his brothers are dead. O Kouravya! Hearing this pleasant news about the destruction
of our enemy, you should be content and can decide on what should be done next."'
