'"Pulastya said, 'O Indra among kings! One should then go to the applauded Kurukshetra. All those who go there
are freed from all their sins. He who always says, "I will go to Kurukshetra, I will live in Kurukshetra," is freed
from sins. O Yudhishthira[There is a minor internal inconsistency, because Pulastya is actually speaking to Bhishma, and Narada is repeating the conversation to Yudhishthira.]! One should live for a month on the banks of the Sarasvati. O lord of the earth! With
Brahma at the forefront, the gods, the sages, the siddhas, the charanas, the gandharvas, the apsaras and the panna-
gas[Another name for the nagas.] always go to the immensely sacred Brahmakshetra[Another name for Kurukshetra.]. O Yudhishthira[There is a minor internal inconsistency, because Pulastya is actually speaking to Bhishma, and Narada is repeating the conversation to Yudhishthira.]! Even if one only wishes to go
to Kurukshetra in one's mind, all one's sins are destroyed and one goes to Brahma's world. O extender of the Kuru
lineage! He who goes to Kurukshetra with devotion, obtains the fruits of a royal sacrifice and a horse sacrifice. O
king! Saluting the immensely strong gatekeeper, the yaksha Machakruka[Yakshas are semi-divine species and companions of Kubera, the god of treasure. Kurukshetra was bounded
to the north by the river Sarasvati and to the south by the river Drishadvati. It also had four yakshas as gatekeepers
or guardians in four directions-Ratna to the north-east, Tarantuka to the northwest, Kapila to the south-west and
Machakruka to the south-east. Machakruka's abode is today identified as Sinkh, a village in the district of Panipat.], one obtains the fruits of one thousand
cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. O one learned in dharma! O Indra among kings! One then goes to Vishnu's supreme region. This is
known as Satata and Hari is there[Hari is Vishnu. The word satata means eternal. The place was presumably thus named because Hari was
eternally present there.]. Bathing there and worshipping Hari, the lord of the three worlds, one obtains a horse sacrifice[Fruits of a horse sacrifice.] and attains Vishnu's world. One should then go to the tirtha of Pariplava, famous in the
three worlds. A man[That is, a man who goes there.] obtains the fruits of agnishtoma and atiratra[A kind of soma sacrifice observed during the night.]. On going to the tirtha known as Prithivi,
one obtains the fruits of a thousand cows[Donating a thousand cows.]. O lord of men! Going on to Shalukini and bathing in Dashashvamedhika[Literally, a place where ten ashvamedha sacrifices have been held. This is probably the one in Didwara village in Jind district.], the visitor of tirthas obtains those fruits[Of ten horse sacrifices.]. On going to the supreme tirtha of nagas known as
Sarpadevi[Literally, the goddess of snakes.], one obtains agnishtoma[The fruits of agnishtoma.] and attains the world of nagas. O one learned in dharma! One should
then go to the gatekeeper Tarantuka[Tarantuka is identified as the village of Behar Jaka today. It is partly in Patiala district (Punjab) and partly in
Kaithal district (Haryana).]. Spending one night there, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.].
One should then go to Panchanada[The land of the five (pancha) rivers (nada), Punjab.], controlled and restrained in diet. Having bathed in Kotitirtha, one obtains
the fruits of a horse sacrifice[There are several places known as Kotitirtha. There is a famous one in Varaha Mula (Baramula). But this is
probably the one in Hat village in Haryana.]. Going on to the tirtha known as Ashvins, one is reborn in beautiful form.

'"'O one learned in dharma! One should then go to the supreme tirtha known as Varaha[Varaha Mula or Baramula is the obvious identification. But one is in the region around Kurukshetra. So one
probably means the village Brah (derived from Varaha) near Jind in Haryana.]. In earlier times,
Vishnu was established there in the form of a boar. O tiger among men! On bathing there, one obtains the fruits of
agnishtoma. O Indra among kings! One should then go to Somatirtha in Jayanti[There are several Somatirthas and several Jayanti rivers. This Jayanti River is near Chandigarh.]. Bathing there, a man obtains
the fruits of a royal sacrifice. Bathing in Ekahamsa, a man obtains the fruits of a thousand cows[Donating a thousand cows.]. O extender of
the Kuru lineage! A visitor of tirthas then goes to Kritashoucha. Such a man becomes pure and attains
Pundarika[Vishnu's epithet.]. Then one goes to the wise Mahadeva at Munjavata[Munjavata is in Nirjan village in Jind district.]. Having stayed there for one night, one attains the status of Ganapati[The ganas are Shiva's companions. Ganapati is not only Ganesha's name. It also means one who is the lord
(pati) of the ganas.]. O great king! Yakshi, famous in the world, is there. O Indra among kings! Going
there, one attains the sacred worlds. O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is famous as the gate to Kurukshetra.
The visitor of tirthas should control his soul and circumambulate it. Bathing in the lake there, which was created
by the great-souled Jamadagnya Rama[Parashurama, the son of Jamadagni.], one should worship the ancestors and the gods. O king! One then becomes successful in one's endeavours and obtains a horse sacrifice[The fruits of a horse sacrifice.].

'"'O lord of men! O Indra among kings! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Rama's lakes[Parashurama's story is recounted in Section 1 (Volume 1). After destroying the kshatriyas, Parashurama
constructed five lakes with their blood and this is known as Samanta Panchaka, the region around Kurukshetra.
Samanta means on all sides and panchaka means five. Alternatively, Samanta Panchaka means the region that was
five yojanas on all sides.]. The radiant
and energetic Rama destroyed the kshatriyas through his valour and created five lakes there. O tiger among men! It
has been heard that he filled them with blood. Thus did he worship all his fathers and grandfathers. O lord of men!
Then the ancestors were pleased and told Rama, "O Rama! O immensely fortunate Rama! O Bhargava[Parashurama was descended from the sage Bhrigu.]! O lord!
We are pleased with your devotion to your ancestors and your valour. O fortunate one! O immensely radiant one!
Ask for a boon. What do you wish for?" O Indra among kings! At these words, Rama, supreme among those who
can smite, joined his hands in salutation and told his ancestors who were established in the sky, "If you are pleased
with me and if I have earned your favour, I wish to obtain a boon from my ancestors that I may again be satisfied
through austerities. Overcome with anger, I destroyed the kshatriyas. Through your energy, may I be freed from
that sin. Let these lakes become tirthas, famous on earth." Having heard Rama's pure words, the ancestors were
extremely delighted and happily told Rama, "Especially because of your devotion to your ancestors, let your austerities become greater. The kshatriyas have been destroyed by you out of wrath. But you have been freed from
that sin, because it was their deeds that brought them down. There is no doubt that these lakes of yours will become tirthas. One who bathes in these lakes and worships his ancestors, will please his ancestors and they will
grant him everything that his mind desires, even if it is the most difficult of objects to obtain on earth, and even the
eternal world of heaven." O king! Having granted this boon, Rama's pleased ancestors showed their respects to
Bhargava and disappeared instantly. It was thus that Rama's lakes, those of the great-souled Bhargava, become sacred. O Indra among kings! If one leads the life of a brahmachari, pure in vows, and bathes in Rama's lakes and
worships Rama, one obtains a lot of gold[This may alternatively mean that one gets the fruits obtained through donating a lot of gold.].

'"'O extender of the Kuru lineage! O king! A visitor of tirthas should go to Vamshamulaka and save his own lineage by bathing in Vamshamulaka. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! One should then go to the tirtha known
as Kayashodhana[Kayashodhana literally means cleansing (shodhana) of the body (kaya). In a village known as Kasoon in
Almora district of Uttarakhand, there is a Kayashodhana tirtha. But this might not be the one that is meant. What is
probably meant is the one in Jind district, in the village of Kasohan (derived from Kayashodhana).]. Bathing in that tirtha, there is no doubt that one can purify one's body. Having purified one's
body, one goes to the supreme and sacred worlds. O Indra among kings! Then one should go to the tirtha that is
famous in the three worlds. In ancient times, the powerful Vishnu rescued the worlds there. O king! Having gone
to Lokoddhara[This literally means the rescue of the worlds.] tirtha, famous in the three worlds, and bathing in that supreme of tirthas, one recovers[Probably in the sense of obtains.] many
worlds for one's own self. One should then go to the tirtha known as Shri[The word literally means wealth, riches and prosperity. There is a Shri tirtha in the village of Simla in
Haryana.] and obtain supreme prosperity. Composed, the brahmachari should then go to Kapila tirtha[There is a Kapila tirtha in a village known as Kalayat, about 80 kilometres from Kurukshetra and close to
Kaithal in Haryana. Kalayat is believed to be derived from Kapilayat. Kapila was a famous sage and the expounder
of sankhya philosophy.]. A man who bathes there and worships the gods and the
ancestors, obtains the fruits of one thousand tawny cows[Presumably donating one thousand tawny cows.]. With a controlled mind, one should then go and bathe
in Surya tirtha[Surya means the sun-god and there are several Surya tirthas. For example, there is a famous one in Mathura.
There is yet another famous one on the banks of the Narmada. But since one is in Haryana, neither of these is
probably meant. One probably means the Surya tirtha in Boadsham village in Nilokheri block in Karnal.]. Having worshipped the gods and the ancestors and having fasted, one attains agnishtoma[The fruits of agnishtoma.]
and goes to the world of Surya. Then, in proper order, the visitor of tirthas goes to Govambhavana[Literally, the abode (bhavana) of cows (gova).]. Having performed one's ablutions there, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. O extender of the Kuru lineage! The
visitor of tirthas then goes to Shankhini[Now the village of Sanghan in Haryana.]. Bathing in that tirtha of the goddess, a man obtains supreme beauty. O
Indra among kings! One should then go to the gatekeeper Arantuka[Barta village in Haryana.]. That tirtha of the great-souled Indra
among the yakshas is on the banks of the Sarasvati. O king! Having bathed there, a man obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. O one who is learned in dharma! O lord of men! Then one should go to Brahmavarta. Bathing in Brahmavarta, a man attains Brahma's world. O one who is learned in dharma! Then one should go to the supreme Su-
tirtha. The ancestors are always there, together with the gods. Having performed ablutions there, devoted to the
worship of the ancestors and the gods, one obtains a horse sacrifice and attains the world of the ancestors. O one
learned in dharma! In due order, one then goes to Ambuvashya. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Bathing in
the tirtha of the lord of treasures[Kubera is the lord of treasures. Since Kubera is mentioned, Ambuvashya is probably Kubera tirtha in
Thanesar, on the banks of the Sarasvati.], one is cleansed of all disease and attains greatness in the world of Brahma.

'"'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is also Matri tirtha[This may be Adi Badri, near Bilaspur in Yamuna Nagar district. There is a temple of Matri Devi or Mantra
Devi there.]. O king! On bathing there, one's offspring
increase and one attains everlasting prosperity. Controlled and restrained in diet, one should then go to Shitavana
tirtha[Possibly Siwan in Kaithal district of Haryana.]. O great king! There is a great thing there, rare elsewhere. O lord of men! One is sanctified in one stroke
only by looking at it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One is purified by shaving one's hair there. O great
king! There is a tirtha there, known by the name of Shvanalomapaha[Literally, a place where a dog's (shvana) hair (loma) is pulled out (apaha).]. O tiger among men! O supreme among
the Bharata lineage! Learned brahmanas who are devoted to tirthas, supreme among brahmanas, perform pranayama[Literally, control over the breath of life, a breathing technique that is an integral component of yoga.] in Shvanalomapaha[The text says Shvanalomapanayana, but Shvanalomapanayana and Shvanalomapaha mean the same thing.]. O Indra among kings! Purified in this way, they become sanctified and attain the
supreme objective. O lord of the earth! Then there is the tirtha known as Dashashvamedhika[Dashashvamedha is a place where ten (dasha) horse sacrifices (ashvamedha) have been held. There are several places with this name and this one is probably the one in Jind district of Haryana.]. O tiger among
men! Bathing there, one attains the supreme goal. O Indra among kings! One should then go to Manusha,
renowned in the worlds. O king! There, a black antelope was oppressed by a hunter. Plunging into a lake, it assumed the form of a human[The word manusha means human and this is Manush, in Kaithal district.]. Bathing there, as a brahmachari, and conquering one's senses, one is cleansed of
all sins and having become pure in soul, attains greatness in the world of heaven. O lord of the earth! The river
renowned as Apaga[In Kaithal district, also known as Apaya and a branch of the Chitang River.] is only a krosha[One-fourth of a yojana.] to the east of Manusha. This is frequented by the siddhas. A man offering a meal of grain[Alternatively, corn.] to the gods and the ancestors there attains all the great fruits of dharma. One brahmana
fed there is equal to one crore brahmanas being fed. Bathing there and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, and
staying there for only a single night, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma.

'"'O Indra among kings! One should then go to Brahma's supreme region. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
This is famous on earth as Brahma's udumbara[Udumbara is the name of the fig tree and also the flower. According to legend, this flowers once in several
thousand years. The udumbara is also the blue lotus, identified with Brahma and the flower itself is also called
Brahma.]. O bull among the Kuru lineage! O Indra among kings! Whoever bathes there, in the lake of the saptarshis[The seven great sages.], in Kedara of the great-souled Kapishthala[Kedara and Kapishthala are clearly different names for the same place. Kapishthala could well be today's
Kaithal.], pure and controlled in mind, attains Brahma and cleansed of all sin and pure in soul, attains Brahma's world. On going to
Kapishthala and Kedara, difficult of access, all one's sins are burnt through the powers of asceticism and one obtains the powers of disappearance. O Indra among kings! One should then go to Saraka[Today's Shergarh, in the Sirsa district of Haryana.], famous in the worlds.
On seeing Vrishadhvaja there on the fourteenth day of krishnapaksha[The dark fortnight of the lunar month.], one obtains everything that one desires
and goes to the world of heaven. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! There are three crore tirthas in Saraka. O lord
of the earth! There are wells and ponds in Rudrakoti. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The tirtha known as
Ilaspada is there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bathing there and worshipping the ancestors and the gods,
one overcomes all misfortunes and attains a horse sacrifice[Fruits of a horse sacrifice.]. O lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Bathing in Kimdana and Kimjapya, a man obtains immeasurable donations and prayers[That is, the fruits of these.]. A man who
performs ablutions in Kalashi, devoted and while controlling his senses, obtains the fruits of an agnishtoma sacrifice. O best among the supreme of the Kuru lineage! The tirtha of the great-souled Narada is to the east of Saraka
and is famous by the name of Anajanma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On bathing in that tirtha[Anajanma.], after
giving up his life, on the instructions of Narada, a man obtains worlds that are difficult to get. On the tenth day of
shuklapaksha, one should go to Pundarika. On bathing there, a man obtains the fruits of a pundarika sacrifice. One
should then go to Trivishtapa, famous in the three worlds. The sacred river Vaitarani, the cleanser of all sins, flows
there[There are several rivers in India by the name of Vaitarani. This one flowed through Haryana.]. Bathing there, and worshipping Vrishadhvaja, the wielder of the trident, one's soul becomes pure and
cleansed of all sins, one goes to the supreme goal. O Indra among kings! One should then go to the supreme Phalakivana. O king! The gods always sought refuge in Phalakivana. They performed great austerities for many thousands of years. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bathing in Drishadvati[The Dhrishadvati literally means a river with many stones and was one of the two major rivers, together
with the Sarasvati.] and worshipping the gods, a man
obtains the fruits of agnishtoma and atiratra. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O Indra among kings! When
one bathes in the tirtha of all the gods, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. On bathing in Panikhata
and worshipping the gods, a man attains a royal sacrifice and obtains the world of the rishis.

'"'O Indra among kings! One should then go to the supreme tirtha of Mishraka. O Indra among kings! We have
heard that there, the great-souled Vyasa, tiger among men, mixed all the tirthas for the welfare of brahmanas. A
man who bathes in Mishraka bathes in all the tirthas. Controlled and restrained in diet, one should then go to
Vyasa's grove. A man who bathes in Manojava obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. Going on to the tirtha
of the goddess in Madhuvati[At the confluence of the rivers Koushiki and Dhrishadvati.], a pure man, who bathes and worships the ancestors and the gods with devotion
and purity, obtains the fruits of one thousand cows on the instructions of the goddess. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! He who is restrained in diet and bathes at the confluence of the Koushiki and the Dhrishadvati, is freed
from all sins. Then there is Vyasasthali[Literally, Vyasasthali means Vyasa's region and there is a Vyasasthali in Kaithal.]. The wise Vyasa was afflicted by sorrow over his son and determined to
give up his body there[What this means is unclear. Vyasadeva is an immortal and his sons are Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura.
There is no record of his having become sorrowful because of any of these sons.]. O Indra among kings! The gods resurrected him there. One who goes to Sthali obtains
the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. O extender of the Kuru lineage! If one goes to the well named Kimdatta and
offers a measure[This measure is called a prastha.] of sesamum seeds there, one attains the supreme objective and is freed from all one's debts.
The tirthas known as Ahas and Sudina are difficult to access. O tiger among men! By bathing there, one attains the
world of the sun. One should then go to Mrigadhuma, renowned in the three worlds. A man who bathes in the
pond known as Ganga there, and worships Mahadeva, the wielder of the trident, obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice. Bathing in Devatirtha, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. One should then go to Vamanaka,
famous in the three worlds[This is a reference to Vishnu's vamana (dwarf) incarnation.]. Bathing in the mark of Vishnu's foot there and worshipping Vamana, one becomes
pure in soul and cleansed of all sins, attains Vishnu's world. Bathing in Kulampuna, a man purifies his own lineage. O tiger among men! A man who goes to Pavana's lake[Pavana is Vayu, the god of the wind.], the supreme tirtha of the Maruts, and bathes
there, attains greatness in Vayu's world. O lord of men! Bathing in the lake of the immortals, through the powers of
the immortals, one attains greatness in the world of heaven, among the immortals. O Indra among kings! O best
among supreme of men! By bathing in Shalishurpa in Shalihotra[Shalihotra is in Sarsa village, about 22 km from Kurukshetra.], in accordance with the rites, a man obtains
the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Shrikunja tirtha is on the banks of the
Sarasvati. O king! On bathing there, a man obtains the fruits of agnishtoma.

'"'O extender of the Kuru lineage! One should then go to the grove known as Naimisha. O Indra among kings!
It is said that in ancient times, the sages who lived in Naimisha[Meaning the forest of Naimisha.], rich in their austerities, went on a pilgrimage
to Kurukshetra. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! They established a grove on the banks of the Sarasvati.
This became a great and satisfying place for the sages to rest. A man who goes and bathes in that grove obtains the
fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. A man who bathes in Kanyatirtha[There is a Kanyatirtha in the village of Balwanti (or Vridhakanya) in Kaithal district.] obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. O tiger
among men! From there, one should go to Brahma's supreme region. Bathing there, a man who is from the other
varnas becomes a brahmana. A brahmana who is pure in soul attains the supreme objective. O best of men! One
should then go to the supreme Somatirtha[Somatirtha is in Jind, known earlier as Jaintapuri.]. O king! On bathing there, a man attains the world of the moon.
Then one should go to the tirtha known as Saptasarasvata[There were seven (sapta) tributaries or different names for the Sarasvati in different places-Suprabha in
Pushkara, Kanchanakshi in Naimisha, Vishala in Gaya, Manasahrida in Uttara Koshala, Suvenu in Kedara, Vimaloda in Gangadvara and Sarasvati in Kurukshetra. Through his powers, the sage Mankanaka guided these seven
to a confluence in Kurukshetra, known as Saptasarasvata.]. Mankanaka, famous in the world of the maharshis,
found success there. O king! We have heard that, in ancient times, Mankanaka cut his hand with the tip of kusha
grass. O king! From that wound flowed out the juices of vegetables. On seeing the vegetable juice, the great ascetic
was filled with delight. The brahmana sage widened his eyes in wonder and began to dance. On seeing him dance,
all mobile and immobile objects were benumbed by his valour and energy, and also began to dance. O king! O lord
of men! Then the gods, with Brahma at the forefront, and the great ascetics, went to Mahadeva and told him about
the rishi. "O God! You should act so that he stops dancing." In a desire to ensure the welfare of the gods, the
god[Mahadeva.] went to the one who was dancing, having lost his senses in delight, and told him, "O maharshi! O one who
is learned in dharma! Why are you dancing? O bull among the sages! Why are you so delighted today?" The sage
replied, "O God! Can you not see vegetable juices flowing from my hand? On seeing this, I am greatly delighted
and am dancing."'

'"Pulastya said, 'The god smiled and told the sage, who was deluded in his delight, "O brahmana! I am not surprised. Look at me." O best of men! O king! Having uttered these words, the wise Mahadeva pricked his thumb
with his fingernail and from that wound emerged ashes, as white as snow. O king! On seeing this, the sage was
struck with shame and fell down at his feet. "I think that there is no other god more supreme than the great Rudra.
O wielder of the spear! You are the refuge of the worlds of the gods and the demons. You have created the universe, the three worlds and everything that is mobile and immobile. O illustrious one! It is into you that everything
enters at the destruction of a yuga. The gods themselves are incapable of comprehending you. How can I? O unblemished one! Brahma and all the other gods can be seen in you. You are everything. You are the maker of the
worlds, the one who makes them act. It is through your grace that the gods are free from fear and can rejoice."

Having thus prayed to Mahadeva, the sage remained prostrate. The rishi said, "O Mahadeva! Through your grace,
may my austerities never diminish." Then the god was delighted and spoke to the brahmarshi. "O brahmana!
Through my grace, your austerities will increase thousandfold. O great sage! I will dwell with you in your hermitage. Those who bathe in Saptasarasvata and worship me will get everything that is difficult to obtain, in this
world and the next. There is no doubt that they will go to Sarasvati's world."

'"'One should then go to Oushanasa[Another name for Kapalamochana tirtha, on the banks of the Sarasvati. This is in the tehsil of Jagadhri,
close to Bilaspur in Haryana. The reference is to Shiva slicing off one of Brahma's heads and this head (kapala)
stuck to his hand, because of the sin of killing a brahmana. The head was released (mochana) on the banks of the
Sarasvati.], renowned in the three worlds[Mahadeva having left, Pulastya is speaking again.]. Brahma, the gods, the sages and the
ascetics are there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In a desire to ensure Bhargava's[This is probably a reference to Parashurama.] welfare, the illustrious
Kartikeya is always present there at the time of the three sandhyas. O tiger among men! Bathing in the tirtha
known as Kapalamochana, one is cleansed of all sins and is freed from all sins. O bull among men! One should
then go and bathe in Agnitirtha, saving one's lineage and attaining the world of Agni. O supreme among the
Bharata lineage! Vishvamitra's tirtha is also there[Vishvamitra's tirtha is probably in Pehowa (Prithudaka). Prithudaka is named after King Prithu. It is believed that Vishvamitra became a brahmarshi in the Sarasvati temple there.]. O great king! On bathing there, one is born as a brahmana.
O tiger among men! If one goes to Brahmayoni[This is in Pehowa.], pure and controlled in mind, and bathes there, one obtains
Brahma's world. There is no doubt that seven generations of one's lineage are sanctified. O Indra among kings!
One should then go to the tirtha that is renowned in the three worlds. O king! This is famous by the name of
Prithudaka and belongs to Kartikeya. Having performed one's ablutions there, one should worship the ancestors
and the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whatever improper act one has committed because of human
intelligence, knowingly or unknowingly, whether one is a man or a woman, is destroyed as soon as one bathes
there. One obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice and goes to the world of heaven. The learned say that Kurukshetra
is sacred. But the Sarasvati is more sacred than Kurukshetra. The tirthas are more sacred than Sarasvati and Prithudaka is more sacred than the tirthas. It is supreme among all the tirthas. He who meditates and then gives up his
body in Prithudaka, will never be tormented by the fear of death[That is, the person becomes immortal.]. This has been sung by Sanatkumara[A sage who was Brahma's son.] and
the great-souled Vyasa. O king! It is also the injunction of the Vedas that one should go to Prithudaka. O supreme
among men! There is no other tirtha as sacred as Prithudaka. There is no doubt that it is purifying, pure and the destroyer of sins. O best of men! The learned say that even people who commit evil acts go to heaven if they bathe in
Prithudaka.

'"'O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O king! There is another tirtha named Madhusrava there[There is a lake named Madhusrava in Prithudaka. Alternatively, one part of the Koushiki River may have
been called the Madhusrava River.]. On
bathing there, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. O best of men! In due order, one should then go
to the tirtha of the goddess, famous in the world and at the confluence of the Sarasvati and the Aruna[Probably the village of Arnai (derived from Aruna), near Pehowa.]. Having
bathed there after fasting for three nights, one is freed from the sin of killing a brahmana. O bull among the Bharata lineage! A man obtains the fruits of agnishtoma and atiratra and sanctifies his lineage for seven generations. O
extender of the Kuru lineage! There is another tirtha named Avatirna there. Out of compassion for the brahmanas,
Darbhin created it in ancient times. There is no doubt that a twice-born who observes vows, takes up the sacred
thread, fasts and follows rituals is a brahmana. O bull among men! But it has been seen from ancient times that one
who bathes there, without rituals and without mantras, becomes a brahmana, with all the results of vows. O tiger
among men! Darbhin[Darbhin is probably the sage Baka Dalbhya, the creator of Avatirna tirtha.] united the four oceans there. Bathing there, one never confronts any calamity. One obtains the fruits of four thousand cows[Donating four thousand cows.]. O Indra among kings! From there, one should go to the tirtha named
Shatasahasraka. The tirtha Sahasraka is also there, famous in the world. Bathing in those two, a man obtains the
fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. His donations and his fasting increase a thousandfold. O Indra among kings! One
should then go to the supreme Renuka tirtha[Renuka tirtha is in Ranacha, Haryana.]. Having performed ablutions there and engaged in the worship of
the ancestors and the gods, one is cleansed of all sins and one's soul becomes pure. One obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. On touching the water in Vimochana, controlling one's anger and controlling one's senses, one is freed
from all sins connected with acquisition[In the sense that acts of acquisition can be undesirable.]. On going to Panchavata[In Palwal district.], celibate and in control of one's senses,
one obtains great merit and greatness in the world of those who are virtuous. There Yogeshvara Sthanu Vrishadhvaja[Mahadeva's names. Yogeshvara means the lord of yoga, while Vrishadhvaja is the one who has a bull on his
standard.] is always present himself. One who goes there and worships the lord of the gods becomes successful.
Varuna's tirtha Oujasa[This is difficult to identify, but was on the banks of the Sarasvati. It was also known by the name of Aditya,
since Varuna was Aditi's son. The word Oujasa itself means energetic.] is resplendent in its own energy. There Brahma, the gods and the rishis, rich in austerities, instated Guha[Kartikeya's name.] as the general of the army of the gods.

'"'O extender of the Kuru lineage! To the east of Oujasa is Kuru tirtha. Bathing in Kuru tirtha, celibate and in
control of his senses, a man is cleansed of all sins, becomes pure in soul and attains the world of the Kurus. Controlled and restrained in diet, one should then go to Svargadvara[Literally, the gate (dvara) to heaven (svarga).]. One attains the world of heaven and goes to
the world of Brahma. O lord of men! Then the visitor of tirthas should go to Anaraka. O king! On bathing there, a
man never confronts any difficulties. O lord of the earth! O best of men! Brahma himself is always present there,
with the gods in attendance, with Narayana at their head. O Indra among kings! O extender of the Kuru lineage!
Rudra's wife is always present there. One who approaches the goddess never faces any difficulty. O great king!
Vishveshvara[Lord of the universe. Mahadeva's name. Mahadeva's wife is Uma. Rudra is another name for Mahadeva.], Uma's husband, is also there. One who approaches Mahadeva is freed from all blemishes. O
great king! On going to Narayana Padmanabha[Padmanabha is Vishnu's name, meaning the one with a lotus (padma) for his navel (nabha).], the destroyer of enemies, one becomes radiant and goes to
Vishnu's world. O bull among men! On bathing at the tirtha of all the gods, a man discards all his misery and
blazes like the moon. O lord of men! Then the visitor of tirthas should go to Svastipura. On going to that sacred
tirtha and satisfying the ancestors and the gods, a man obtains the fruits of an agnishtoma sacrifice. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! There is a lake named Ganga there and a well. O lord of the earth! Three crores of tirthas are
in that well[That is, the well is equal to three crores of tirthas.]. O king! On bathing there, a man attains the world of heaven. Bathing in the river there and worshipping Maheshvara, a man attains the status of a Ganapati and rescues his lineage. One should then go to Sthanuvata, renowned in the three worlds. On bathing and staying there for a night, a man attains Rudra's world. Then
one should go to Badaripachana and Vasishtha's hermitage there[There is a tank named after Vasishtha in Budha Khera, near Safidon.]. After fasting there for three nights, a man
should eat jujubes[The berries.]. O lord of men! One who lives only on jujubes for twelve complete years, and one who fasts
there for three nights, are equal. O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas then reaches Indra's path. On fasting there for
one day and one night, one attains greatness in Shakra's world. Going to Ekaratra and fasting there for one night,
controlled and truthful, one attains greatness in Brahma's world. O one learned in dharma! Then one should go to
the tirtha that is renowned in the three worlds. This is the hermitage of the great-souled Aditya, full of energy. On
bathing there and worshipping Vibhavasu[Vibhavasu is another name for the sun-god. Aditya means any god, a son of Aditi. In this context, the sungod is meant.], a man goes to the world of Aditya and rescues his lineage.

'"'O extender of the Kuru lineage! A man who is a visitor of tirthas should go and bathe in Soma tirtha. There is
no doubt that such a man will go to the world of the moon. O one learned in dharma! One should then go to the
tirtha of the great-souled Dadhicha. O king! This is pure and purifying and is famous in the world. Angiras of the
Sarasvata lineage, treasure of austerities, is there. A man who bathes in that tirtha obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice and there is no doubt that he attains Sarasvati's world[The word used is sarasvata. Other than Sarasvati's world, this can also mean the world of the Sarasvata
brahmanas.]. Controlled and celibate, one should then go to
Kanyashrama. O king! If one fasts and lives there for three nights, one obtains one hundred celestial maidens and
goes to Brahma's world. Brahma, the gods, the sages and the ascetics go there every month and obtain great merits. If one touches the water at Samnihiti when the sun has been devoured by Rahu[The time of a solar eclipse.], one has obtained one hundred eternal horse sacrifices[One has obtained the merits of such sacrifices.]. Whatever tirthas exist on earth and in the sky, female rivers, male rivers, lakes, all
streams, wells, ponds and everything else that is sacred, there is no doubt that they are gathered every month at
Samnihiti. Whatever evil act a man or a woman may have committed, there is no doubt that they are all destroyed
on bathing there. One goes to Brahma's world in a lotus-coloured vehicle. Having worshipped the yaksha gatekeeper Arantuka, if one touches the water in Kotirupa, one obtains a lot of gold. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! There is a tirtha, a pond named Ganga, there. O one learned in dharma! On bathing there, controlled and
celibate, one obtains the eternal fruits of royal and horse sacrifices. There is a sacred tirtha Naimisha on earth and
Pushkara in the sky. But in all the three worlds, Kurukshetra is special. Even the dust carried away by the wind in
Kurukshetra takes the performer of evil acts to the supreme objective. To the south is Sarasvati and to the north Drishadvati[Sarasvati should actually be to the north and Drishadvati to the south.]. Those who live in Kurukshetra live in heaven. "I will go to Kurukshetra, I will live in Kurukshetra."

He who utters this single sentence is cleansed of all sins. O king! Those who live in sacred Kurukshetra, Brahma's
altar and frequented by the brahmarshis, there is no doubt that one should not sorrow for them. The region between
Tarantuka and Arantuka and between Machakruka and Rama's lakes is Kurukshetra Samantapanchaka[Samantapanchaka is another name for Kurukshetra, usually explained because of the five (pancha) lakes
created by Parashurama. Alternatively, it is said that the land was five yojanas in every direction.] and is
known as the grandfather's northern altar[The grandfather is Brahma. Kurukshetra is often called Brahma's altar (Brahmavedi) or the northern altar
(Uttaravedi).].'"'