Vaishampayana said, 'O unblemished one! O king! I will now recount to you in entirety the lineages of Prajapati
Daksha, Vaivasvata Manu, Bharata, Kuru, Puru, Ajamidha and Yadava. These are great and holy accounts that lead
to bliss. The histories of these illustrious ones bring wealth, fame and long life.

'Prachetas[In this context, Brahma.] had ten righteous sons, who were like maharshis in their energy and possessed a radiance that
was ascending. They were known as the first ancestors. In earlier times, these greatly energetic ones were burnt
with the lightning from clouds. O tiger among men! Daksha was born from Prachetas and from Daksha were born
all subjects. Hence he is the grandfather of the worlds. He united with Virini and gave birth to 1000 sons, all rigid
in their vows like he himself. In an assembly of these 1000 of Daksha's sons, Narada taught them the supreme philosophy of sankhya[One of six schools of philosophy, attributed to the sage Kapila.], the means to salvation. O Janamejaya! In a desire to create more beings, Prajapati Daksha
created fifty women and accepted them as his daughters. He gave ten to Dharma, thirteen to Kashyapa and twenty-
seven to Chandra, with the last given the task of reckoning time.

'Kashyapa was Marichi's son. Dakshayani was supreme among his thirteen wives. Through her, he gave birth to
the valorous adityas, Indra and the others and also to Vivasvat. From Vivasvat was born a son, the lord Yama. O
king! Martanda was born as Yama's son and Martanda had the wise lord Manu as his son. Manu's lineage became
famous as that of men[The word for men is manava.]. All men, including Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and others, were descended from Manu. O
king! At that time, the Brahmanas were united with the Kshatriyas. The Brahmanas among men were devoted to
the study of the Vedas and their branches. It is said that Manu[Manu is not the name of a single person. There were fourteen Manus, each presiding over the interval between a round of destruction and recreation. The first Manu (Svayambhuva) produced the first round of human beings. However, the present round of human beings is descended from the seventh Manu (Vaivasvata).] had ten mighty sons who were devoted to the
pursuit of the Kshatriya dharma-Vena, Dhrishnu, Narishyanta, Nabhaga, Ikshvaku, Karusha, Saryati, Ila as the
eighth and Prishadhra as the ninth. Nabhagarishtha was the tenth. In addition, Manu had fifty other sons on earth.
But it is heard that they all quarrelled with each other and perished.

'The learned Pururava was born from Ila and it is said that she was both his father and mother. Pururava ruled
over thirteen islands in the ocean. He was immensely famous and though human, was always surrounded by superhuman beings. Pururava was intoxicated with his valour and waged war against the Brahmanas. Paying no heed to
their protests, he robbed them of their riches. O king! On seeing this, Sanatkumara came from Brahma's world and
showed him the right way. But he did not accept this. At this, the maharshis were angry and cursed him. That king
of men perished because of avarice, power and arrogance. He lived in the world of the gandharvas with Urvashi.
He brought to the earth the three types of sacrificial fire. Through Urvashi, six sons were born to this son of Ila's-
Ayus, Dhiman, Amavasu, Dridhayus, Vanayus and Shatayus. It is said that Ayus had five sons through Svarbhanu's
daughter-Nahusha, Vriddhasharma, Raji, Rambha and Anenas. Nahusha was Ayus's son. He was wise and devoted to the truth. O lord of the earth! Following the dictates of dharma, he ruled over a large kingdom. Nahusha protected the ancestors, gods, rishis, Brahmanas, gandharvas, uragas[Nagas or serpents.] and rakshasas. He treated Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas equally. He killed hordes of dasyus[Robbers or dacoits. The word also means evil beings or demons that were enemies of gods and men. It can
also mean outcasts or outcastes.] and made them pay tribute to the rishis. Like animals,
that valorous one forced them to carry him on their backs. He overwhelmed the gods with his energy, austerities,
valour and power and became like Indra himself. Through Priyavasa, Nahusha had six sons-Yati, Yayati, Samy-
ati, Ayati, Pancha and Uddhava.

'Nahusha's son Yayati was devoted to the truth and became an emperor. He ruled over the entire earth and performed many sacrifices. With great power, he worshipped the ancestors and the gods, who were always present.
Yayati was always invincible and showed great kindness towards his subjects. His sons were great archers who
possessed all the qualities. O great king! They were born from his wives, Devayani and Sharmishtha. From Devayani were born Yadu and Turvasu. From Sharmishtha were born Druhyu, Anu and Puru. O king! In accordance
with dharma, he ruled over his subjects for a long time. Then he was attacked by the dreadful old age and he lost
his beauty. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been overcome by old age, the king told his sons Yadu,
Puru, Turvasu, Druhyu and Anu, "O sons! I desire to savour the pleasures of youth. As a young man, I wish to
spend my time with young women. Help me." Yadu, the eldest son and born from Devayani, replied, "For what
purpose do you want our youth? What act do you wish to perform?" Yayati told him, "Accept my old age from me.
With your youth, I will satisfy my senses. During a long sacrifice, I was cursed by the sage Ushanas. Therefore, I
have lost all my powers of enjoying desire. O sons! I am suffering because of this. Any one of you can rule over
the kingdom with my body. And I will satisfy my desire by taking up a new and young body." Yadu and the other
brothers did not agree to take up his old age.

'At this, the youngest son, Puru, always devoted to the truth and powerful, said, "O king! Enjoy yourself with a
new and young body. As you command, I will take up your old age and rule over the kingdom." At these words,
the rajarshi[Yayati.] used the power of his austerities to transfer his old age to his great-souled son. The king again became a young man with Puru's age. Puru ruled over the kingdom with Yayati's age. After a thousand years, the invincible Yayati had still not satisfied his desires and told his son Puru, "You are my heir. You are the son through
whom my lineage will continue. From now on, my lineage will be known in this world as Puru's lineage." O tiger
among kings! Then he instated Puru as the king. After a long time, he succumbed to the laws of time.'
