Vaishampayana said, 'When the mighty-armed one who extended the fame of the Kuru lineage departed, great-
souled brahmanas who knew the Vedas, were knowledgeable in the vedangas[The six vedangas are shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda (prosody), vyakarana (grammar),
nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy) and kalpa (rituals).], those who were devoted to contemplation of the supreme being, those who were immersed in the supreme lord and bards who knew the ancient
tales followed him. O king! There were also raconteurs, ascetics, those who dwelt in the forests and brahmanas
who read divine tales in melodious voices. Surrounded by these and many others who were skilled in recounting
stories, Pandu's son travelled like Vasava[Indra.] surrounded by the Maruts[Gods of the wind.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
The bull among Bharatas saw beautiful and colourful woods, lakes, rivers, oceans, countries and sacred places of
pilgrimage. Reaching the source of the Ganga, the lord began to live there. O Janamejaya! Now listen, as I tell you,
about the wonderful act that the pure-souled charioteer, who was foremost among the Pandus, performed.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Kunti's son lived there with the brahmanas, the brahmanas performed many agnihotras[Sacrifices to Agni. Agnihotra means maintenance of the sacred fire and offering oblations to it.]. O king! The fires were kindled and blazed as offerings were made into them. Offerings of flowers were made on both sides of the river by the learned and great-souled ones who were always unwavering in their vows and they successfully consecrated there. As a result of this, the source of the Ganga became
extremely beautiful.

'One day, when this was going on, the son of Kunti and Pandu entered the Ganga to have a bath. O king! He
performed his ablutions and offered water to his grandfathers. He was about to climb out of the water, wishing to
perform rites to the fire. O great king! The mighty-armed one was grasped and pulled into the water by Ulupi,
daughter of the king of the nagas, who could travel where she willed. There, in the revered palace of the naga
named Kouravya[Coincidentally, Kouravya means a descendant of Kuru, as does Kourava.], the Pandava saw a fire that had been built up well. Kunti's son Dhananjaya performed his rites
in that fire. Witnessing the unhesitating offering of oblations, Hutashana[Agni.] was satisfied.

'After having performed his rites before the fire, Kunti's son smilingly uttered these words to the daughter of the
naga king. "O beautiful one! O timid one! How did you perform such a courageous act? What beautiful land is
this? Whom do you belong to and whose daughter are you?" Ulupi replied, "O Partha! The serpent Kouravya is
descended from the lineage of Airavata. I am his daughter and a serpent named Ulupi. O Kounteya[Kunti's son, that is, Arjuna.]! I saw you
descend into the water to have a bath and was robbed of my senses by the god of love[Ananga. Ananga means one without a body and there is a story where the god of love lost his body because
he managed to annoy Shiva.]. O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! The god of love is churning me. I am yet a maiden. Please me today by giving yourself to me." Arjuna
said, "O fortunate one! I have been commanded by Dharmaraja[Yudhishthira.] to observe brahmacharya for twelve years and
do not have control over myself. O dweller in the water! I do wish to do that which brings you pleasure. But never
before this have I spoken that which is untrue. O serpent-maiden! How can I bring pleasure to you and yet not do
that which is untrue? How can I not violate dharma?"

'Ulupi replied, "O Pandava! I know why you are roaming the earth. I know that you are observing brahmacharya on the instructions of your superior. This was the rule you made among yourselves for Drupada's daughter, that anyone deluded enough to enter would retire to the forest and observe brahmacharya for a period of twelve
years. The exile is therefore for the sake of Droupadi. You are observing that dharma. But in this case, dharma
does not suffer. O large-eyed one! It is your duty to save those who are distressed. By saving me, dharma is not violated. O Arjuna! Even if there is a slight transgression of dharma, by granting me life, you will achieve greater
dharma. O Partha! O lord! I desire you. Desire me in return. That is the view of those who are rigid in their vows.
Know that if you do not do this, I will certainly die. O mighty-armed one! Grant me life and achieve supreme dharma. O supreme among men! I am now seeking refuge with you. O Kounteya! You have always protected those
who are weak and without protectors. I am miserable and weeping and am seeking refuge with you. I am overcome
with desire and am seeking you. Do that which is pleasurable to me. Satisfy my desire by giving yourself to me."

Hearing these words Kounteya then did what she wanted, accepting dharma to be the reason. The powerful one
spent the night in the palace of the serpent. When the sun rose, he too arose from Kouravya's abode.'
