'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When those divisions were shattered by Pandu's son and fled quickly, what was
the state of your mind then? When divisions are shattered and do not see a place where they can make a stand, it is
very difficult to counter this. O Sanjaya! Tell me everything about this."

'Sanjaya replied, "O lord of the earth! Despite this, there were those who wished to bring pleasure to your son.
To preserve their fame in this world, those brave ones followed Drona. They raised their weapons and approached
Yudhishthira. They performed noble and terrible deeds and were truly fearless. O lord! They detected a weakness
in the infinitely energetic Bhimasena, the brave Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna. The Panchalas cruelly urged,
'Drona! Drona!' However, your sons urged all the Kurus, 'Not Drona!' One side said, 'Drona! Drona!' The other
side said, 'Not Drona!' The Kurus and the Pandavas seemed to be gambling over Drona. Wherever Drona sought
to attack the chariots of the Panchalas, Panchala Dhrishtadyumna stationed himself at those spots. There was a terrible battle where one did not follow the respective divisions. Brave ones clashed against brave ones and roared
against the enemy. The enemy was incapable of making the Pandavas tremble there. But because they remembered
their own hardships, they made the enemy divisions waver. Though they were modest, they were overcome by
anger and driven by their spirit. They were prepared to give up their lives and sought to kill Drona in that great battle. There was a tumultuous battle, in which, those infinitely energetic ones offered their lives as stake. It was as if
iron was clashing against rock. Even the aged could not remember a battle like this. O great king! Such had not
been witnessed earlier, nor heard of. When those brave ones were slaughtered, the earth trembled, oppressed by the
great burden of those two oceans of soldiers. As the armies whirled around, the firmament seemed to roar and
stand still. Ajatashatru angrily advanced against your son. Drona roamed around in that battle. He approached the
Pandu army and shattered it with thousands of sharp arrows. They were routed by Drona's extraordinary deeds.
Then the commander[Dhrishtadyumna.] himself engaged with Drona and there was an extraordinary battle between Drona and
Panchala. It is my view that there has never been anything that is equal to this.

'"Like a fire, Nila burnt down the Kuru army. The arrows were the sparks and he was like a fire burning down
dry wood. When he was burning down the soldiers, Drona's powerful son, who had wished to have an encounter
with him from earlier times[Nila was the king of Mahishmati and there was an ancient enmity between him and Ashvatthama.], smilingly addressed him. 'O Nila! What will you gain by burning down these warriors with the rays of your arrows? Fight with me and angrily strike me with your swift arrows.' Nila's eyes were
like the petals of lotuses. He pierced the one whose face was as beautiful as a blooming lotus and whose body was
like a collection of lotuses[Nila pierced Ashvatthama.]. On being thus suddenly pierced, Drona's son used three sharp and broad-headed
arrows to slice down the bow, standard and umbrella of the enemy. Nila swiftly jumped down from his chariot and
grasped a shield and a supreme sword, wishing to sever, like a bird[The image is of a bird flying away with a prey in its talons.], the head of Drona's son from his body. O
unblemished one! But Drona's son smiled. He used a broad-headed arrow to sever his head, with a beautiful nose
and with earrings, from his body. The face was as radiant as the full moon. The eyes were like the petals of lotuses.
The shoulders were elevated and he[Nila.] was tall. He was slain and fell down on the ground. At this, the Pandava
soldiers were distressed and became extremely anxious. Blazing in his energy, Nila was killed by the son of the
preceptor. O venerable one! All the Pandava maharathas began to think, 'How will Vasava's son be able to save us
from the enemy? The brave one is engaged in fighting with the soldiers in the southern direction, with the remaining soldiers in the samshaptaka and narayana army.'"'
