Vaishampayana said, 'O king! The force and speed of his thighs raised a storm, like strong winds when shukra and
shuchi draw near[Shukra and shuchi mean the summer season. Specifically, shukra is the month of Jyeshtha. Shuchi is a general
term for the hot season, the months of Jyeshtha and Ashada.]. He strode on, tearing down large trees[The word used for large tree is vanaspati, which means lord of the forest.] with flowers and fruit on them and demolishing
creepers that obstructed the way. He uprooted, with his immeasurable power, trees and bushes and his speed dazed
Pandu's sons[That is, the others.]. Using his arms as boats, he swam across many streams whose banks were distant. Fearing Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.], they assumed disguises. He carried his delicate and illustrious mother on his back, when the going was difficult, over riverbanks and uneven terrain.

'When it was evening, those bulls of the Bharata lineage reached an impenetrable forest where roots, fruits and
water were scarce and the place was full of cruel birds of prey and beasts. The twilight became terrible and fearful
with birds and beasts and the directions disappeared, as a storm was imminent. Those descendants of the Kuru lineage were tired and thirsty and overcome with sleep. They could proceed no further. Then Bhima entered a large,
desolate and terrible forest. He saw a beautiful fig tree[Nyagrodha. Can also be translated as banyan tree.] that offered extensive shade.

'O bull among the Bharata lineage! Placing them there, he said, "O lord[He was speaking to Yudhishthira.]! Rest here. I am going to bring water.
I hear the sweet voices of water-dwelling cranes. I am certain there must be a large lake here." O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! His elder brother permitted him to go and he went where the water-dwelling cranes were. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! There, he drank the water and bathed. O king! He brought water back by soaking his
upper garment. Swiftly retracing his steps, he went to his mother, who was two measures of distance away.

'On seeing his mother and brothers asleep on the ground, Vrikodara was afflicted with great grief and lamented.
"Earlier, they could not sleep in Varanavata on expensive beds. Now they are asleep on the ground. Kunti is the
daughter of Kuntibhoja and is blessed with all the auspicious marks. She is the sister of Vasudeva, who grinds his
enemies down. She is the daughter-in-law of Vichitravirya and the wife of the great-souled Pandu. She is as radiant
as the filament of a lotus. The most delicate of all women, she should always sleep in palaces, on the most expensive of beds. Look at how she now sleeps on the ground. She has given birth to sons through Dharma, Indra and
the wind-god. She is now tired and asleep on the ground like a common person. What more painful sight will I see
than what I am seeing now? I see those tigers among men sleeping on the ground. The king, who is always devoted
to dharma and who deserves all the three worlds as his kingdom, is tired and asleep on the ground like an ordinary
person. He whose complexion is like the blue ocean[Arjuna.] and who is unequalled among men is asleep on the ground
like an ordinary person. What can be more painful than this? The twins, who are as handsome as the divine
Ashvins, are asleep on the ground like ordinary men. He who has no evil relatives who defile his lineage lives happily, like a single tree in a village. When there is only one tree with leaves and fruits in a village, it is without kin,
becomes sacred and venerated and is worshipped. They who have many relatives who are virtuous and brave live
happily in this world, without disease. They make the sons of their friends and relatives powerful and prosperous,
living on each other's support like trees in a garden. We have been banished by the evil-souled Dhritarashtra and
his sons. We escaped the conflagration he had instructed. Having escaped from that fire, we have now found refuge
under this tree. Having suffered unequalled misfortunes, where will we go now? I think I see a city not far away
from this forest. But someone should be awake while they are sleeping. Therefore, I will stay awake. When they
awake and have rested, they can drink the water." Having decided this, Bhima himself stayed awake.'
