Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! Vaikartana Karna obtained the generalship and was addressed by the king himself[Duryodhana.], in those gentle and fraternal words. He instructed the soldiers to be yoked and for the sun to rise. O immensely wise one! What did he do next? Tell me that."

'Sanjaya replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having ascertained Karna's views, your son instructed that
the soldiers should be yoked and that musical instruments should be sounded. O venerable one! When that long
night was over, a great sound of 'Array, yoke,' suddenly arose. In the army, elephants and chariots were prepared.
O lord of the earth! Infantry and cavalry were readied. The spirited warriors shouted at each other. There was a
large and tumultuous noise that seemed to touch heaven. Karna, the great archer and supreme among rathas, was
seen stationed on his chariot. His flags were white and his steeds possessed the complexion of the rising sun. His
bow had a golden back and his standard bore the mark of an elephant's housing. The army had quivers full of arrows and armlets. They wielded shataghnis[Unidentified weapon that could kill one hundred people at one go.], bells, lances, spears, clubs and bows. In his chariot and flags, the
son of the suta was seen, sparkling like a clear sun. O father[The word used is tata.]! He blew on his conch shell, which was decorated
in nets of gold. He stretched his giant bow, which was embellished with gold. O venerable one! On seeing Karna,
the great archer and supreme among rathas, stationed on his chariot, like a rising sun that drives away thousands of
clumps of darkness, the Kouravas, tigers among men, no longer thought about Bhishma and Drona's death. O venerable one! Urging the warriors with sounds from his conch shell, Karna made the Kourava army march out. Wishing to defeat the Pandava, Karna, the great archer and scorcher of enemies, arranged a vyuha in the form of a
makara[Mythical animal that can be translated as crocodile or shark.]. O king! Karna stationed himself at the makara's mouth. The brave Shakuni and maharatha Uluka were
at the eyes. Drona's son was at the head. In the midst of his brothers and surrounded by a large army, King Duryodhana was at the neck. O Indra among kings! Kritavarma stationed himself along the left leg, with the narayana
and gopala forces who were indomitable in battle[Gopalas are cowherds. The narayana and gopala soldiers were offered
by Krishna to Duryodhana.]. O king! Goutama, for whom truth was valour, was at the
right leg, surrounded by great archers from the Trigarta and southern regions. Shalya was stationed at the rear left
leg, with a large army that had been raised from the Madra region. O great king! Sushena, unwavering in his resolution, was on the right, surrounded by a thousand chariots and a hundred tuskers[This means on the rear right leg. Sushena was one of Duryodhana's
brothers. However, he has already been killed by Bhima in Section 69
(Volume 6) and this is also true of Chitrasena. Therefore, Chitrasena and
Chitra mentioned here were probably not Duryodhana's brothers.]. The brave brothers and
kings, Chitrasena and Chitra, were at the tail, surrounded by a large army. O Indra among kings! Thus did the
supreme among the best of men emerge.

' "On seeing this, Dharmaraja glanced towards Dhananjaya and said, 'O Partha! In the battle, behold the large
army of the sons of Dhritarashtra. They have been arrayed by Karna and are protected by brave maharathas. The
remnants of the large army of the sons of Dhritarashtra are bereft of brave ones. O mighty-armed one! It is my
view that the remnants are feeble and like grass. There is only one great archer who is stationed there and that is
the son of the suta. That supreme among rathas cannot be vanquished by the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas, the
kinnaras, the giant serpents and all the mobile and immobile creatures in the three worlds. O mighty-armed one! O
Phalguna! If you kill him today, you will be victorious. The stake that has been in my heart for twelve years will be
uprooted. O mighty-armed one! Knowing this, construct the vyuha that you desire.' On hearing his brother's
words, the Pandava with the white horses arranged the soldiers in a counter-vyuha that was in the shape of a halfmoon. O king! Bhimasena stationed himself on the left flank and the immensely strong and great archer, Dhrishtadyumna, was on the right. Pandava himself was at the centre of the vyuha, with Krishna as his charioteer. With
Dharmaraja, Nakula and Sahadeva were at the rear. Protected by Kiriti, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja from Pancha-
la protected Arjuna's wheels and did not desert him in the battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The remaining brave kings armoured and stationed themselves in the vyuha, according to each one's position, enterprise and
spirit. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did the Pandavas arrange themselves into a great vyuha.

' "The great archers on your side made up their minds to fight. On seeing the army in the battle, arranged into a
vyuha by the son of the suta, your son and all the others on our side thought that the Pandavas had already been
killed. O lord of men! In similar fashion, on seeing the Pandava soldiers arranged into a vyuha, Yudhishthira
thought that the sons of Dhritarashtra and Karna had already been killed. Conch shells, kettledrums, drums, cymbals and other musical instruments were loudly sounded and the noise spread in every direction. O king! There was
a loud noise in both the armies. Desiring victory, the brave ones roared like lions. There were sounds of the neighing of horses and the trumpeting of elephants. O lord of men! There were fierce sounds from the wheels of chariots. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing the great archer, Karna, stationed at the front of the vyuha, no
one[Among the Kouravas.] thought of Drona's loss. On both sides, the soldiers were full of great spirits and the men and elephants
were cheerful. O king! Wishing to kill each other quickly, they remained stationed in the battle. O Indra among
kings! Karna and Pandava were resplendent in the midst of their soldiers and were extremely angry on seeing each
other stationed thus. As they advanced towards each other, the two armies seemed to be dancing around. Wishing
to fight, they emerged from the flanks and smaller segments. O great king! A battle commenced between men, elephants, horses and chariots and they firmly wished to kill each other." '
