'Sanjaya said, "O king! When Sudakshina and the brave Shrutayudha were killed, all your soldiers became angry
and swiftly attacked Partha. O king! The Abhishahas, the Shurasenas, the Shibis and the Vasatis started to pour
down a shower of arrows on Dhananjaya. With his arrows, Pandava simultaneously killed six hundred of these.
They were terrified and fled, like small animals before a tiger. Having returned again, they surrounded Partha from
all sides. Wishing to defeat the enemy in battle, he was fighting with the foes and killing them. Arrows were quickly released from Gandiva and descended on them. Dhananjaya brought down heads and arms. Without any gaps,
the earth was strewn with fallen heads. Crows, vultures and wild crows flew around and seemed to form a shadowy
canopy over the field of battle. On seeing that they were being routed, Shrutayu and Achyutayu became intolerant
with rage and began to fight against Dhananjaya. They were strong, proud and brave, born in noble lineages and
strong-armed. O great king! Desiring great fame, they swiftly showered down arrows from the left and from the
right. For the sake of your son, those two archers wished to kill Arjuna. They angrily covered Arjuna with thousands of arrows with drooping tufts, like clouds filling a lake. The angry Shrutayu struck Dhananjaya, best among
rathas, with a yellow and sharp javelin. Powerfully pierced by the enemy, the destroyer of enemies was overcome
by supreme lack of consciousness in the battle, confounding Keshava also. At that instant, maharatha Achyutayu
severely struck Pandava with an extremely sharp spear. It was as if he was pouring a corrosive[The word used is kshara. This can be translated as acid or alkali, anything caustic. Hence, corrosive is better.] into the great-
souled Pandava's wound. Severely pierced, Partha held onto the pole of the standard. O lord of the earth! A great
sound, like the roar of lions, arose from all your soldiers, because they thought that Dhananjaya was dead. On seeing Partha bereft of his senses, Krishna was also extremely tormented and as his well-wisher, he comforted
Dhananjaya with words of assurance. Those two foremost rathas[Shrutayu and Achyutayu.] were successful in striking the target and covered Dhananjaya and Varshneya Vasudeva with showers of arrows from every direction. In that battle, they made
the wheels, the poles, the horses, the standards, the pennants and the entire chariot disappear and it was
extraordinary.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bibhatsu slowly regained his senses, like one who has returned from the
capital of the king of the dead. He saw that his chariot and Keshava were covered with a net of arrows and he also
saw the two enemies stationed before him, like flaming fires. At this, maharatha Partha invoked the Shakra
weapon[Weapon named after Indra.]. From this, thousands of arrows with drooping tufts were released. Those arrows that were created
struck those two great archers. Their arrows, which were traversing through the sky, were shattered by Partha's arrows. Through the force of his arrows, Pandava swiftly countered their arrows. He roamed around there, fighting
with the maharathas. The arms and heads of those two were severed by Phalguna's arrows. They fell down on the
ground, like two trees uprooted by the wind. On seeing that Shrutayu had been killed and that Achyutayu had also
been killed, everyone in the world wondered. It was as if the waters in the ocean had dried up. Partha then slew
five hundred rathas who had followed them and penetrated the army of the Bharatas, killing the best among them.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Shrutayu and Achyutayu had been killed, their sons, Ayutayu
and Dirghayu, the best among men, became very angry and attacked Kounteya. Oppressed on account of their fathers, they showered down many different kinds of arrows. But the extremely wrathful Arjuna used straight-tufted
arrows to instantly despatch them to Yama's abode. He agitated those ranks, like an elephant amidst a pond full of
lotuses. Those bulls among kshatriyas were incapable of resisting Partha.

'"O king! Thousands of angry elephant-riders and well-trained elephants from Anga surrounded Pandava. Those
elephants were like mountains and were urged on by Duryodhana. There were kings from the east and the south,
with Kalinga at the forefront. When they descended on him, he swiftly shot arrows from Gandiva and severed the
heads and the arms of those who were at the front, together with the ornaments. Those heads and arms, together
with the armlets, were strewn around on the ground. They were as dazzling as golden stones, encircled with
snakes. Arms and heads were severed and fell down. They seemed to be like birds falling down from trees. Thousands of elephants were pierced by arrows and blood began to flow from them. They seemed to be like mountains,
with haematite[Gairika, alternatively red chalk.] flowing from them. Slain by Bibhatsu's sharp arrows, others were lying around. There were
many mlecchas[Barbarians, those who did not speak Sanskrit.] on the backs of elephants, hideous in form. O king! They were attired in many different kinds of
garments and wielded diverse kinds of weapons. They were slain by colourful arrows and looked resplendent,
blood flowing from their limbs. Wounded by Partha's arrows, elephants vomited blood. Thousands of them had
their bodies mangled, with their riders and with those who followed them on foot. They shrieked as they fell down.
Others fled in different directions. Many were greatly terrified and as those elephants fled, they crushed their own
ranks. There were other fighting elephants that were kept separately and they were as virulent as poison[This was like a reserve force.]. These
went mad and behaved in the same way.

'"There were asuras skilled in the use of maya, terrible and with fierce eyes. There were Yavanas, Paradas,
Shakas, Sunikas, Goyaniprabhas, mlecchas, armed Kalakalpas, Darvabhisaras, Daradas, Pundras and Bahlikas.
There were hundreds and thousands of them and they formed a large force. They showered down weapons, but
proved to be incapable. The arrows released by Dhananjaya enveloped all those soldiers, like a cloud of locusts in
the sky. There were mlecchas with heads partly or completely shaved. Some had matted hair. Others were filthy in
conduct, with malicious faces. Through the maya of his weapons, he killed hundreds of those assembled ones.
Hundreds of those who lived in congregations were pierced by arrows[The text uses the word samghacharina, that is, those who live in samghas. In a general sense, this means people
who live in congregations or communities. But more specifically, it means a community of monks.]. Those who lived in mountainous caverns
were frightened in that battle and fled. Hundreds of elephants, horses, infantry and mlecchas were brought down
by the arrows. Wild crows, herons and wolves were delighted and drank the blood. He created a passage with destroyed foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants[The imagery is of a river, where these bodies were like the banks.]. The showers of arrows were the terrible boats. The hair was
the moss and weeds. Blood constituted its fearful current and the waves were terrible. The helmets were the small
fish and it seemed to be like Death at the end of a yuga. The bodies of slain elephants choked the flow and that river of blood flowed towards the left[The word used is uttara. Generally, this means north. However, left is acceptable and the left is inauspicious.]. There were bodies of princes, elephants, horses, rathas and foot soldiers and
one could not distinguish high ground from the low, like when Vasava showers profusely[When Indra rains down heavily, high ground cannot be distinguished from the low.]. Everywhere the earth
flowed over with blood. The bull among kshatriyas sent six thousand brave and supreme ones and a thousand other
supreme kshatriyas to the world of the dead. As if decreed by destiny, thousands of elephants were pierced by the
arrows. They lay down on the ground, like mountains shattered by thunder. Thus did Arjuna roam around and kill
horses, rathas and elephants. He was like an elephant with rent temples crushing a forest of reeds. He was like a
fire, aided by the wind, consuming a forest, with its many trees, lantanas and creepers and heaps of dense and dry
grass. Your soldiers were like a forest and Krishna was like the wind. The angry Pandava Dhananjaya, with his
rays of arrows, was like the fire. He made the seats of chariots bereft of them and made them lie down on the
ground. With the bow in his hand, Dhananjaya seemed to dance around in that melee. His arrows were like the
touch of the vajra and he covered the ground with blood. The angry Dhananjaya penetrated the army of the
Bharatas.

'"As he advanced, Shrutayu from Ambashtha[Not to be confused with earlier Shrutayu.] countered him. O venerable one! As he endeavoured, Arjuna
swiftly used sharp arrows tufted with the feathers of herons to bring down his horses. Partha used other arrows to
sever his bow. At this, Ambashtha's eyes became red with anger. He grasped a club and attacked Keshava and maharatha Partha in that battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave one laughed and raised his club. He
obstructed the chariot with his club and struck Keshava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Keshava had been struck with the club, Arjuna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, became extremely angry with Ambashtha. In that battle, he used gold-tufted arrows to cover the supreme of rathas and his club, like clouds enveloping the rising sun. Partha then used other arrows to shatter the club of the great-souled one and it was extraordinary. On seeing that it had fallen down, he grasped another mighty club and used that to again repeatedly
strike Arjuna and Vasudeva. Arjuna used two kshurapra arrows to slice down his arms, with the upraised club. He
then used another arrow to slice down his head, which was like Indra's pole. O king! Thus slain, he roared and fell
down on the ground. It was like Indra's standard, when it has been freed from the bonds that tie it to the implement. Partha was then surrounded on all sides by a dense array of chariots and hundreds of elephants and horses
and disappeared, like the sun shrouded by clouds."'
