'Sanjaya said, "O god among gods among men! O Pandava! I will now take your leave and go. May you be fortunate. As a result of the distress in my mind, I hope I have not spoken words that should not be spoken and caused
you distress. I am taking my leave of Janardana, Bhimasena, Arjuna, Madri's sons, Satyaki and Chekitana. May
you be happy and prosperous. O kings! Look at me with eyes that are full of equanimity."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O Sanjaya! With our permission, depart in peace. You have not said anything unpleasant.
They know, and all of us know, that when you speak in the midst of an assembly hall, you are pure in your soul. O
Sanjaya! You were sent as an appropriate messenger. You are extremely dear to us. You have spoken words full of
welfare and you have exhibited good conduct. O suta! Your views have not been clouded by delusion. When we
have spoken the truth, you have not been angered. You have not spoken harsh and piercing words. Nor have you
spoken bitter and acerbic words. O suta! We know that your words are guided by dharma and artha and that they
are full of meaning, not meant to hurt. For us, you are a beloved messenger. Vidura is the only other one who could
have come here. In earlier times, we have seen you frequently. You are our friend, like Dhananjaya himself. O Sanjaya! Having quickly departed from here, serve the brahmanas who are deserving of worship. They are pure and
brave and are devoted to the Vedas[The text uses the word charana, that is, the brahmanas are devoted to a charana. Charana means a school or
branch of any of the Vedas.]. They have been born in noble lineages and have all the qualities of dharma.
The brahmanas are devoted to studying and live on alms. There are ascetics who always live in the forest. Greet all
the elders on my behalf. O raconteur! Ask about the welfare of each one.

'"You must meet King Dhritarashtra's priest, his preceptors and all his sacrificial priests[Ritvijas.]. O son[The word used is tata.]! You must
greet each one, as he deserves. O suta! You must meet each one and ask about his welfare. Our beloved preceptor[Drona.]
follows brahmacharya and the Vedas and never deviates from the right course of action. You must greet and honour Drona, as he deserves. He is the one who made the four techniques of weaponry known again[Invoking with mantras, releasing, countering and withdrawing.]. You must
swiftly go to Ashvatthama and ask about his welfare. He has studied and follows the Vedas[The word charana is used again.]. He is the one who
made the four techniques of weaponry known again. He is as swift as the son of a gandharva. You must then go to
the abode of Sharadvat's son[Kripa.]. He is a maharatha and supreme among those who know about weapons. O Sanjaya! You must remember me repeatedly and touch Kripa's feet with your hand. You must also grasp the feet of
Bhishma, supreme among the Kurus, and mention me to him. Valour, non-violence, austerities, wisdom, good conduct, learning and fortitude reside in him. O Sanjaya! You must salute the aged king[Dhritarashtra.] and tell him that I am well.
He governs the Kurus with the sight of wisdom. He is extremely learned and the learned one tends to the aged.

'"O Sanjaya! Dhritarashtra's eldest son is evil, stupid, deceitful and prone to bad conduct. He now rules over the
entire earth. O son[The word used is tata.]! You must ask about Suyodhana's welfare. O Sanjaya! His younger brother is equally evil. He
has always been like him in conduct[Duhshasana and Duryodhana respectively.]. He is a great archer and supreme among the Kuru warriors. O son[The word used is tata.]! You
must ask about Duhshasana's welfare. O son[The word used is tata.]! You must ask about the welfare of the son of the vaishya[Meaning Vidura. However, because Vidura is mentioned later, this could also be a reference to Yuyutsu, Dhritarashtra's son through a vaishya wife.]. He has
never liked the idea of a war. He is immensely wise and has all the qualities of dharma. He is supreme among all
wise ones and is never confused. O son[The word used is tata.]! Ask about the welfare of Chitrasena[In Section 27 (Volume 3), Chitrasena is mentioned as one of the kings who gathered to gamble. But he didn't
have enough of a role to play for him to be mentioned here.]. He is unmatched in cutting and
playing with dice[The cutting part isn't clear. It must have had something to do with the dice. It is possible that this means cheating with the dice.]. He is extremely deceitful and is skilled in gambling and knows the heart of the dice. He is incapable of being defeated in duels with the dice. You must greet the learned bull of the Bahlika lineage, who has
always had no other desire than that of there being peace among the Bharatas. He may happily greet me again, as
he used to do earlier. It is my view that Somadatta must also be honoured. He is supreme among those who possess
all the qualities. He is learned and is never cruel. Because of his affection, he has always endured all the injury[Presumably injury meted out by the Kouravas.]. O
Sanjaya! Somadatta's son[Somadatta's son is Bhurishrava.] is the most venerable among the Kurus. He is our brother and friend. He is a great
archer and supreme among charioteers. Ask him about his welfare and that of his advisers. There are other young
ones who are chief among the Kurus. They are our sons, grandsons and brothers. If you meet them along the way,
on my behalf, ask about their welfare. Dhritarashtra's son has assembled kings to fight against the Pandavas. There
are the foremost among the Vasatis, the Shalvakas, the Kekayas, the Ambashthas and the Trigartas. There are
brave ones from the east, the north, the south, the west and all the mountainous regions. They are non-violent and
are proper in conduct. O son[The word used is tata,.]! Ask all of them about their welfare. There are those who ride on elephants, horses
and chariots, infantry and large masses of aryas. Tell all of them that I am in good health. Ask all of them if they
are in good health. There are advisers who have been appointed by the king. There are gatekeepers and others who
lead the army. There are those who calculate revenue and expenditure. There are great ones who think about his[Dhritarashtra's.]
welfare. The king from the mountainous region of Gandhara, Shakuni, is unrivalled in cutting and playing with the
dice. O suta! He heightens the honour of Dhritarashtra's son. O son[The word used is tata.]! He is false in his intelligence. But ask him
about his welfare. O son[The word used is tata.]! Ask about Vaikartana's[Karna's.] welfare. He is unmatched in deluding the deluded. The Pandavas are impossible to vanquish. But alone, on a single chariot, that brave one hopes to defeat them. Ask about
the welfare of the infinitely intelligent and far-sighted Vidura. He is devoted to us. He is our senior and our servant.
He is our father, our mother and our well-wisher. He is our adviser.

'"O Sanjaya! The aged women who possess all the qualities are regarded by us like our mothers. Meet with all
those aged women when they are assembled together, and on our behalf, show them honour. 'O those among you
who have sons who are alive! Do your sons treat you properly and without violence?' O Sanjaya! Having said this,
subsequently tell them that Ajatashatru and his sons are well[Ajatashatru (Yudhishthira) had a single son through Droupadi. But between them, the Pandavas had many sons.]. O Sanjaya! There are those whom you know to be
our wives[The Pandavas had no wives there. So it could mean those who were like their wives, that is, the wives of the
Kouravas. Alternatively, the word used is bharya. While this primarily means wife, it also means a dependent
woman, such as a servant maid.]. O son[The word used is tata.]! All of them should be asked about their welfare. 'Are you protected properly? Do you have
fragrances? Are you uncensured and not distracted when you undertake the duties of the household? O fortunate
ones! Do you behave properly towards your fathers-in-law? Are you well and are you treated without violence?
Can you ensure your own conducts, so that your husbands remain devoted towards you?' O Sanjaya! There are
those whom you know to be our daughters-in-law[Probably, like daughters-in-law.]. They have all the qualities and have been born in noble lineages. When you meet them, tell them that Yudhishthira has happily saluted those mothers of children. O Sanjaya!
You must meet the maidens in their houses. On my behalf, you must ask them about their welfare and say, 'May
you be fortunate and may you have husbands who are devoted to you. May you also be devoted to your husbands.'

O son[The word used is tata.]! You must ask about the welfare of the courtesan women. 'Do you have ornaments, garments and fragrances? Are you happy and prosperous, without being frightened? Are your visits short? Are your words
shorter[Meaning, visits to courtesans are brief.]?' The sons of the servant maids, the servants of the Kurus, the many hunchbacked and crippled ones
who have sought refuge, must be told that I am well. Ask how the worst among them fares. 'Do you continue to be
engaged in your old pursuits? Does Dhritarashtra's son provide you objects of pleasure? There are those who have
lost limbs, or are miserable, or dwarfs. Does Dhritarashtra's son treat you non-violently?' There are many who are
blind and aged. There are many who have to earn a living through their hands. Tell them that I am well and ask
how the worst among them fares. 'Do not be unhappy because of this sorry life. This must be because of sins committed in earlier lives. After subduing my enemies through the aid of my well-wishers, I will sustain you with garments and food. I used to provide stipends to brahmanas. I will provide more in the future. I will see all of you
properly taken care of.' Tell the king[This could mean either Dhritarashtra or Duryodhana.] whatever you hear about their success. There are those who are unprotected, weak and always stupid, preoccupied with their own selves. They are miserable in every way. O son[The word used is tata.]! You
must ask about their welfare on my behalf.

'"O son of a suta! There are others who have sought refuge with Dhritarashtra's son, arriving from many directions. On seeing them, or anyone who is deserving of honour, ask if they are well in every way. There are those
who have come and others who are arriving-kings and messengers from all the directions. O suta! Ask all of
them about their welfare. Later, you should tell them that I am well. There are no warriors on earth who are equal
to the ones Dhritarashtra's son has obtained. But dharma is eternal. And my dharma is that all immensely strong
enemies must be destroyed. O Sanjaya! You must make Dhritarashtra's son, Suyodhana, listen to my final words.

'The heart in your body has a desire to rule the Kurus without any rivals. This has no rationale. We will not do
anything that doesn't bring you pleasure. Give us our Shakrapura[Shakra is Indra's name and Shakrapura is another name for Indraprastha.]. O foremost among the warriors of the Bharata lineage! Otherwise, be prepared to fight."'
