'The gandharva said, "When she disappeared, the king, the one who caused the downfall of enemy armies, was
struck by desire and fell down on the ground. On his falling down on the ground, the one with the beautiful smile
and swelling and rounded hips appeared once again before the king. In a gentle voice, the fortunate beauty then
spoke to the king, the extender of the Kuru lineage who had lost his senses because of desire, 'O tiger among
kings! O fortunate one! O scorcher of enemies! You are known in the world. You should not be seen in loss of your
senses. Arise! Arise!' Having heard these sweet words, the king looked up and saw standing before him the lady
with the wide hips.

'"The ruler of men then addressed the black-eyed one in these words, his heart burning with the fire of desire
and his words weak with emotion, 'O black-eyed lady! O fortunate one! I am burning with desire. O lady with the
large eyes! I am seeking you. Accept me in return, because my life is ebbing away because of you. O you whose
complexion is like the inside of a lotus! Love's sharp arrows never stop piercing me. O fortunate one! The god of
love has bitten me like a large snake. O one with the unblemished face! O one with the tapering thighs! O one with
a voice like the song of the kinnaras! My life is in your hands. O one with unblemished and beautiful limbs! O one
with a face like a lotus or the moon! O bashful one! I shall certainly not be able to live without you. O lady with
the large eyes! O black-eyed one! You should not forsake me. O beautiful one! You must save me with your affection. O beautiful and timid one! O one with thighs like a plantain tree! Marry me according to the gandharva rites,
because among all forms of marriage, the gandharva is said to be the best.'

'"Tapati said, 'O king! I am not in control of myself. I am a daughter under a father's superintendence. If you
really seek pleasure from me, go and ask my father for me. O ruler of men! You say that I have robbed you of your
life. But know that at the first sight, you have also robbed me of my life. O best of kings! I am not the mistress of
my own body. Therefore, I cannot come to you. Women are always dependent. But is there any woman in the three
worlds who will not desire a husband like you, who has a noble lineage and is always benevolent to his dependants? Therefore, since the time is right, ask for me from my father Aditya, with reverence, austerities and rituals.
O destroyer of enemies! O king! If he desires to give me to you, I shall always be under your superintendence. O
bull among the Kshatriyas! I am Tapati, Savitri's youngest sister. I am the daughter of Savitar[A name for the sun.], who is a torch to
the worlds.'"'
