'Bhishma said, "Our famous dynasty has all the qualities and virtue. Over all the other kings, it has now become
the supreme overlord on earth. Earlier, this dynasty was protected by many great-souled kings who knew dharma.
Never has our dynasty come close to destruction. Satyavati, the great-souled Krishna[Vedavyasa.] and I have ensured that
the likes of you are established, so that the threads of our lineage continue. O son[Bhishma was speaking to Vidura in particular.]! It is my duty, and especially
yours, to take measures so that this dynasty expands like the ocean. I have heard of the princess of the Yadavas, a
lineage that is equal to ours. There is also Subala's daughter and the daughter of the king of Madra. They are all
from good lineages, beautiful and protected by their kin. Those bulls among the Kshatriyas are suitable for an alliance with us. O Vidura! O foremost among those who are wise! I think we should choose them for offspring and
the continuation of our lineage. What do you think?"

'Vidura replied, "You are our father. You are our mother. You are our supreme preceptor. Therefore, you yourself decide and do what is good for our lineage."'

Vaishampayana said, 'He[Bhishma.] heard from the Brahmanas that Subala's daughter, the fortunate Gandhari, had obtained a boon by pleasing Hara, the god who robbed Bhaga of his eyes[This is a reference to an incident when the gods refused to give Shiva (Hara) a share in the sacrificial offerings. Shiva ripped out the god Bhaga's eyes.]. She would have 100 sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he heard this, Bhishma, grandfather of the Kurus, sent a message to the king of
Gandhara. Because of the blindness, Subala hesitated. But taking into account the famous lineage and the conduct
and intelligence of the Kurus, he agreed to give his daughter Gandhari, who was devoted to dharma, to
Dhritarashtra.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! When Gandhari heard that Dhritarashtra was blind and that both
her father and mother had agreed to give her to him, the beautiful one who possessed many qualities picked up a
piece of cloth. As devotion to her husband, she tied up her eyes with this, deciding resolutely that she would never
experience more than what her husband could. Thereupon, Shakuni, the son of the king of Gandhara, brought his
sister to the Kouravas, with a lot of riches. The brave one gave his sister, accompanied by her possessions, and after being honoured by Bhishma, returned to his own city. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Gandhari of the
beautiful hips satisfied all the Kurus with her acts, behaviour, attentiveness and conduct. She was devoted to her
husband. She did not even mention other men in her speech.'
