Yudhishthira said, "O father! You should explain to me the difference between sankhya and yoga. O one who
knows about everything! O supreme among the Kuru lineage! You know everything about this."

'Bhishma replied, "Brahmanas who follow sankhya praise sankhya and those who follow yoga praise yoga. Driven by reasons and sentiments, they proclaim the superiority of their own school. O afflicter of enemies! Learned
ones who follow yoga have appropriately given reasons for their superiority. How can someone who does not believe in an Ishvara be emancipated? But those brahmanas who follow sankhya also speak about appropriate reasons. By knowing the progress of everything, one becomes detached from material objects. When one ascends upwards from the body, it is evident that this can be nothing other than emancipation. This is said by the immensely
wise ones who are conversant with the emancipation set out in sankhya. Whichever school one follows, one should
accept those reasons. One will then be capable of ensuring benefit with those words. The views of the virtuous
must be accepted and there are virtuous and revered people on both sides. The reasons behind yoga can be experienced. Those for sankhya are determined on the basis of the sacred texts. O son! O Yudhishthira! It is my view that
both sides represent the truth. O king! It is my view that both sides represent knowledge and are revered by the virtuous. If one follows the sacred texts and practises them, both will convey to the supreme objective. O unblemished one! Both are equal in recommending purification and compassion towards beings. Both are comparable in
the vows that have been laid down. They are only unequal in their philosophy."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! They are comparable in vows, purification and compassion. O grandfather!
In that case, why is it that they are not equal in their philosophy? Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "Attachment, confusion, affection, desire and anger-by resorting to yoga, one severs these
five sins and obtains success. Large fish break through nets and regain the water. In that way, through yoga, one
transcends sins and attains the objective. O king! Greed and other bonds are powerful. Having severed these, the
yogi treads along the supreme path, sparkling and auspicious. O king! There is no doubt that weak animals are enmeshed in nets and later destroyed. This is also true of those who do not possess the strength of yoga. O Kounteya!
Weak ones are like fish caught in a net. O Indra among kings! Those yogis who are extremely weak also meet their
end in the same way. O destroyer of enemies! This is like birds caught in fine nets. They can free themselves from
that hardship, but only if they are strong. O scorcher of enemies! There are yogis who are bound down by the
bonds of action. They are weak and are destroyed, while the powerful ones escape. O king! A small and weak fire
is pacified when a large quantity of kindling is placed atop it. O lord! It is the same with yogis who are weak. O
king! However, if that fire obtains its strength back again, it can swiftly burn down the entire earth, fanned by the
wind. When strength has been generated in him, a yogi blazes in his energy and is immensely strong. He is like the
sun that has arisen at the time of destruction and can dry up the entire universe. O king! A weak man is borne away
by the current. A weak yogi is helpless and is borne away by the objects of the senses. However, an elephant is capable of withstanding the same strong current. Having obtained the strength of yoga, one can discard many objects
of the senses. O Partha! Through the strength of yoga, a yogi can bring under his control and penetrate Prajapatis,
rishis, the great elements and the Ishvaras. O king! Yama, the enraged destroyer, and Death, terrible in valour, cannot afflict the yogi, who is infinite in his energy. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Through the power of yoga, he
can create many thousand who are like him and wander around the entire earth in these forms. Through practising
fierce austerities, he can also obtain the objects of desire. O Partha! He can then fling them away again, like the sun
discarding its qualities of energy. O king! There is no doubt that with the strength of yoga, and having freed himself from the bonds, a person can obtain Vishnu's powers and free himself. O lord of the earth! I have spoken to
you about the power of yoga. I will now again tell you about the subtle signs. O lord! O bull among the Bharata
lineage! The indications of dharana and samadhi in the atman are subtle[Dharana and samadhi are the last two stages in the eightfold path of yoga. Dharana can loosely be translated as
concentrated meditation and samadhi as liberation.]. Listen to them. An archer who is controlled and not distracted can strike the target. There is no doubt that a yogi who is properly focused in this way
can obtain emancipation. A man ascending a flight of stairs with a liquid in a vessel, concentrates his mind[So that the liquid does not spill.]. The
mind has to be withdrawn and rendered immobile in that way. O king! Uniting it with the atman in yoga, he becomes completely immobile. He cleanses his atman and makes it as resplendent as the sun. O Kounteya! O king!
When a boat is tossed around on the mighty ocean, it is like a boatman taking control and swiftly steering the boat.
In that way, a yogi who knows the truth unites his atman in samadhi. O king! Having gone to a desolate spot, he
then gives up the body. O bull among men! A charioteer can yoke well-trained horses, control them and swiftly
take the archer to the designated region. O king! That is the way a yogi is concentrated in dharana. He  swiftly
reaches the supreme spot, like a released arrow hitting the target. A yogi makes his self penetrate the atman and
remains motionless. He destroys his sins and obtains the spot that is without decay. O infinitely valorous one! O
lord of the earth! In his navel, in his throat, in his head, in his heart, in his chest, along his flanks, in his eyes, in his
touch and in his nose, and in the spot that he has resorted to, the yogi controls himself in that great vow and merges
his self with the subtle atman. Cleansed in his wisdom, he quickly burns all his deeds, auspicious and inauspicious.
Resorting to that excellent yoga, he frees himself as he wills."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! How does a yogi obtain strength? What should he
eat and what should he conquer? You should tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "A yogi obtains strength by eating grain, by eating oilcakes and avoiding fatty products. O
destroyer of enemies! A yogi obtains strength by being pure in soul and eating only once a day and subsisting for a
long period of time on rough barley[Rough in the sense of not being mixed with anything else.]. A yogi obtains strength by only drinking water mixed with milk once a fortnight, once a month, once in two months, and finally, once a year. O lord of men! A yogi obtains strength and purifies his soul properly by always avoiding meat. O king! O supreme among kings! He conquers desire, anger, cold,
rain, fear, sleep, breath, the penis, material objects, hatred, which is so difficult to conquer, terrible thirst, touch and
all the other senses and sleep, which is so difficult to defeat. The great-souled ones blaze and find their own subtle
selves in their atmans. Those  immensely  wise  ones  are  devoid  of  attachment.  Their  riches  are  meditation  and
studying. It  is  the  view  that  the  path  followed  by  learned  brahmanas  is  extremely  difficult  to  traverse.  O  bull
among the Bharata lineage! No one who is disturbed can walk along this. It is like a fearful forest full of terrible
serpents and reptiles, covered with pits and without water, dense with many thorns and difficult to travel in. It is
like a path frequented by bandits, with nothing to eat and no trees, as if the large trees have been burnt down in a
forest conflagration. Young people do not find safety along it. Since the path of yoga is like this, very few brahmanas can travel along it. But it is said that the other paths, which have safety, have many taints. O lord of the
earth! Those who can sustain yoga can safely walk along it, though it is as sharp as a razor's edge. But those who
have not cleansed their souls find it difficult to remain there. O son! However, if dharana is disturbed, it takes one
to an inauspicious end. O king! This is like a blind man steering a boat on the ocean. O Kounteya! But if one is
based in dharana in the proper way, one can free oneself from death, birth, unhappiness and happiness. All this has
been stated in different sacred texts on yoga. This entire and supreme yoga is certainly seen among brahmanas.
The great brahman is supreme. Those great-souled ones can enter the lord Brahma, Vishnu, the granter of boons,
Bhava, Dharma, the six-faced one[Kartikeya.], the six great sons of Brahma[Brahma had ten sons. Because of the number six, this probably refers to the Vedangas.], tamas, which makes one face such a great
deal of difficulty, the pure sattva, supreme prakriti, the goddess Siddhi, Varuna's wife, all energy, great patience,
the sparkling lord of the stars and all the stars, the Vishvadevas and the ancestors, their followers, all the mountains
and the terrible oceans, all the rivers, the forests, the clouds, serpents, mountains, the large numbers of yakshas, the
directions and the groups of gandharvas, male and female. Those great-souled ones and these great ones attain
each other. The yogi becomes perpetually free. O king! This auspicious account is about the immensely valorous
god. The great-souled yogi has Narayana in his soul and overcomes everything that is mortal."'
