'"The lord said, 'An ascetic 247 and a yogi is he who performs prescribed action without attachment to the fruits
of the action, not someone who gives up sacrifices 248 and action. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! What is
known as asceticism, know that to be yoga. Because without giving up desire, no one can become a yogi. For a
sage desirous of ascending to yoga, action is said to be the means. For a person who has ascended to yoga, tranquillity 249 is said to be the means. When a person who gives up desire loses addiction to sensual outcomes and is
also not attached to action, then he is said to have ascended to yoga. Use the atman to raise the atman. Do not lower the atman. The atman is the atman's friend and the atman is the atman's enemy. 250 The atman which has been
used to conquer the atman is the atman's friend. For someone who has failed to control the atman, the atman harms
like an enemy. For someone who has controlled the atman 251 and is tranquil, 252 the paramatman 253 is undisturbed with cold, warmth, happiness, unhappiness and respect and disrespect. He whose atman is satiated with
knowledge, 254 who is undisturbed and has conquered his senses, and he who looks upon a lump of earth, stone
and gold equally, is said to be yogi who has achieved union. Equal in treatment towards well-wisher, colleague,
255 enemy, neutral, 256 arbiter, a hateful person, friend 257 and a righteous person or a sinner, he 258 is superior.

'"'Seated in a secluded place, alone, controlled in mind and body, without desire, without receiving and giving,
259 a yogi should always try to pacify his atman. In a pure place that is not too high and not too low, unmoving, he
will place his seat, cloth and hide on kusha grass. 260 There, focusing the intellect, controlling the action of the
mind and the senses, seated on that seat, he will practise yoga to purify the atman. Still, body, head and neck erect
and unmoving, gazing at the tip of one's nose 261 and not looking in any other direction. Tranquil in the atman,
without fear, established in the rite of brahmacharya, controlling the mind and uniting the intellect with me, immerse yourself in me. In this way, the yogi will always pacify the atman and be unwavering in his mind, and established in me, will attain supreme and peaceful liberation. O Arjuna! He who eats too much cannot achieve yoga.
Nor he who doesn't eat at all. Nor he who sleeps too much or stays awake too much. He who is measured in food
and movement, measured in effort towards action, measured in sleep and awakening. For him, yoga destroys unhappiness. When the intellect is specially controlled and established in the atman, in that situation, indifferent towards all desire, yoga is said to have been achieved. For a yogi whose intellect is controlled and the atman is united, know the simile to be a lamp that doesn't flicker in a place where there is no wind. When the mind is controlled
and rendered inactive through the practice of yoga, when the atman sees the atman in the atman and is satiated.
262 When he 263 feels the extreme bliss that is beyond the senses and realized through the intellect, undisturbed
from truth. 264 Obtaining that, not 265 thinking other gains to be superior to this. Established in that, not disturbed
even by great unhappiness. Know this, without any contact with unhappiness, to be yoga. Without hopelessness,
266 one must practise that yoga with perseverance. Forsaking in entirety all desire that results from wishes, 267
using the mind itself to restrain the senses from everything, using concentrated intellect to gradually withdraw, establishing the mind in the atman and thinking about nothing, 268 withdrawing from whatever the fickle and restless mind veers towards, withdrawing it from that, bring it under the control of the atman. Tranquil in mind, having
pacified the rajas quality, without sin, 269 having attained the brahman, the yogi achieves supreme happiness. Like
that, always concentrating on the atman, the pure yogi easily obtains intense bliss from proximity to the brahman.
The person immersed in yoga looks on everything equally and sees the atman in all beings and all beings in the atman. He sees me everywhere and everything in me. I am never invisible to him. Nor is he invisible to me. He is
based in equality and worships me, I who am present in everything. Wherever that yogi is, he is established in me.
O Arjuna! He who compares 270 with his own self and regards happiness and unhappiness in everything 271
equally, that yogi is supreme, according to me.'

'"Arjuna said, 'O Madhusudana! Because of restlessness, 272 I don't see the yoga based on equality that you
have propounded as permanent. O Krishna! The mind is restless and the senses strong and firm. Therefore, I think
restraining it is as difficult as the wind.' 273
'"The lord said, 'O mighty-armed one! There is no doubt that the mind is restless and difficult to control. But O
Kounteya! Through practice and detachment, it can be restrained. My view is that yoga is difficult for someone
whose mind is uncontrolled. But it is possible to achieve for someone whose mind is controlled and who makes
special effort.'

'"Arjuna said, 'O Krishna! A person who has faithfully practised yoga, but later becomes careless and his mind
deviates from yoga, cannot achieve liberation through yoga. What happens to him? O mighty-armed one! Distracted from the path of attaining the brahman, such a wavering person is dislodged from both, 274 like a torn cloud.
Doesn't he perish? O Krishna! I have this doubt that only you can completely eliminate. Because there is no one
other than you who can remove this doubt.'

'"The lord said, 'O Partha! In this world, nor in the other world, is there any destruction. Because, O son, 275 a
person who acts well 276 never comes to grief. He who has deviated from the path of yoga attains the worlds of
the righteous 277 and dwells there for many years. Thereafter, he is born in a righteous and wealthy household. Or
he is born in the family of wise yogis. But such birth is very rare in this world. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!
In that birth, obtains 278 that intelligence 279 about liberation from an earlier birth and thereafter, strives again for
liberation. Because of that earlier practice, is almost involuntarily, attracted. 280 A person who seeks yoga transcends the Vedas. 281 Striving harder than on that earlier occasion, pure in heart, the yogi obtains liberation after
many lives and later, achieves the supreme objective. The yogi is superior to those who practise austerities, superior to the learned 282 and superior to those who perform action. 283 That is my view. O Arjuna! Therefore, become
a yogi. My view is that he who is devoted and worships me, with his self immersed in me, is the most accomplished among all yogis.'"'
