'Lomasha said, "When they had sought refuge in the ocean that was Varuna's abode, the Kaleyas began to act for
the destruction of the three worlds. In their wrath, in the night, they always devoured sages and virtuous ones in
hermitages and sacred places. In Vasishtha's hermitage, the evil-souled ones devoured one hundred and eighty-
eight brahmanas and nine other ascetics. On going to Chyavana's sacred hermitage, frequented by brahmanas, they
devoured one hundred sages who lived on fruit and roots. They thus acted during the night. During the day, they
entered the ocean. In Bharadvaja's hermitage, they destroyed twenty brahmacharis who lived on air and water. In
this way, one after another, the danavas destroyed all the hermitages. Intoxicated by the strength of their arms and
overcome by destiny, the Kaleyas chased and killed many masses of brahmanas in the night. O supreme among
men! Nevertheless, though the daityas acted in this way towards hermits and ascetics, men did not know this. In
the morning, the bodies of sages, emaciated from restrained diets, would be seen, lifeless on the ground. The earth
was full of bodies without flesh, without blood, without marrow and without entrails, with masses of bones strewn
like conch shells. The earth was covered with broken sacrificial pots and ladles and the remains of agnihotra sacrifices. Oppressed by the fear of the Kaleyas, the world lost all enterprise. Studying of the Vedas and the uttering of
exclamations at the time of making oblations ceased. Sacrifices and rituals were destroyed.

'"O lord of men! When men began to decay in this fashion, they were scared and in an attempt to save themselves, fled in all the directions. Some entered caves and others hid behind waterfalls. Still others were so anxious
about death that they lost their lives out of fear. There were those who were brave and great archers. In great pride
and with great care, they tried to hunt down the danavas. But they could not find them, because they had sought
shelter in the ocean. Failing to find them, they were destroyed because of the exhaustion. O lord of men! The world
neared destruction and all sacrifices and rituals were destroyed. The thirty gods were extremely distressed. With
the great Indra, they assembled and consulted each other out of fear. They worshipped the unvanquished
Vaikuntha[Vaikuntha is one of Naryana's ephithets and also the name of his abode.] Narayana and sought refuge with him. Then the assembled gods spoke to Madhusudana, 'O lord!
You are the creator, the sustainer and the protector. You are the world. You are the creator of everything, with
limbs and without limbs[That is, mobile and immobile.]. O lotus-eyed one! In earlier times, when the earth was destroyed, for the welfare of
the world, you raised it up, in the form of a boar[This is a reference to Vishnu's boar (varaha) incarnation.]. O supreme among beings! In ancient times, you destroyed the
extremely valorous and ancient daitya Hiranyakashipu in the form of narasimha[This is a reference to Vishnu's man-lion (narasimha) incarnation.]. The great asura Bali was incapable of being killed by all beings. In the form of a dwarf, you expelled him from the three worlds[This is a reference to Vishnu's dwarf (vamana) incarnation.]. The asura
who was a great archer was famous by the name of Jambha[Several demons had the name of Jambha. The more common Jambha was killed by Indra, though in one of
the accounts, he was aided by Vishnu. There was another Jambha who was killed by Krishna.]. He was cruel and the obstructor of sacrifices and
you ensured his destruction. Such are your deeds and they are too many to count. O Madhusudana! We are scared
and frightened and you are our refuge. O god! O lord of the gods! It is for this reason and for the welfare of the
world that we are bringing this to your notice. Protect the worlds, the gods and Shakra from this great fear.'"'
