'Droupadi said, "On this, an ancient story is recounted, the conversation between Prahlada and Bali, the son of Virochana. Prahlada was Bali's father's father and was the Indra of the daityas. That immensely wise Indra of the
asuras was one to whom all knowledge of dharma had been imparted. 'O father[Bali is asking this. The word used is tata, which means father, but not only in the narrow sense. It can be
used for any superior, including a grandfather.]! Does forgiveness lead to welfare, or is it better to seek revenge? I have a doubt about this. So please tell me exactly by answering my question.
You are knowledgeable about dharma. So please tell me, without a doubt, which of the two is better. I will then do
exactly as you have instructed me.' On being thus asked, the grandfather answered everything exactly. He was
wise and answered everything exactly, so that the doubt in the question could be removed.

'"Prahlada said, 'O son[The word used is tata again. This means not only son in the narrow sense, but anyone younger in a broad
sense.]! Revenge is not always superior. Nor is forgiveness always superior. Learn the nature of both, so that there is no scope for doubt. O son! A man who always forgives suffers from many faults. His
servants treat him with contempt and others are also disrespectful. All the beings never bow down before him.
Therefore, the learned say that perpetual forgiveness should be avoided. Disregarding him, the servants fall prey to
many sins. Those with limited intelligence try to take his riches away from him. The servants also appropriate his
vehicles, garments, ornaments, beds, seats, food, drink and all his other articles. They do not give to those to whom
presents should be given, as instructed by the master to give, but fall prey to their own desires. The master is never
shown the respect he deserves. To be ignored in this world is worse than death. O son! Slaves, sons, servants and
even those who are not servants speak harsh words to such a forgiving person. They abuse the forgiving person
and even desire his wife. The wife too follows her own desire and intelligence. Even if a slight bit of punishment is
deserved and it is not meted out, those lovers of pleasure will injure him and resort to evil acts. These and other
faults are always associated with those who are forgiving. O Virochana's son! Now listen to the faults associated
with those who never forgive. If in the wrong place, or even in a right one, a person is afflicted with passion and
anger and metes out various punishments on the strength of his energy, he will be clouded because of his energy
and will face conflicts with his allies. He will receive hatred from the worlds and from his relatives. Because of the
contempt displayed, such a man suffers loss of riches and receives abuse, disrespect and disregard. He confronts
remorse, hatred and confusion and creates enemies. If in anger, a man inflicts different kinds of punishments on
men, he is swiftly deprived of his riches, life and relatives. If he equally uses his force on benefactors and those
who wish him ill, such a man is shunned in the world, like a snake inside a house. How can the world confer good
fortune on someone who is shunned? People are sure to hurt him, as soon as they find a weakness. Therefore, one
should not always be overpowering. Nor should one always be gentle. He who is gentle at the right time and harsh
at the right time always finds happiness in this world and the next. Listen, I will now tell you in detail about the
time when one should be forgiving. This has been recounted by the learned ones earlier and should always be followed. If a former benefactor commits a crime that is not too great, in view of the earlier favour, this transgression
should be pardoned. Those who commit an offence out of stupidity and seek pardon should be forgiven, because
learning is not easily available everywhere to men. Even if the offence is slight, an offender who commits a crime
with full knowledge, but claims he did not know, should be punished, because this is crookedness. The first offence
should be forgiven for all beings. But when they commit the second one, however slight, it should be punished. If
a crime is committed unknowingly, it is said that this should be pardoned, but only after proper examination. Gentleness can vanquish gentleness and gentleness can also vanquish harshness. There is nothing that gentleness cannot vanquish. Therefore, gentleness is the stronger of the two. But one should act after considering the time and the
place, the strengths and the weaknesses. The wrong time and place can lead to failure. Therefore, one should wait
for the right time and place. Sometimes, an offender can be pardoned out of regard for the people. These have been
described as the right times to forgive. At times other than these, it has been said that one should use one's
energy[That is, punish.].'"
'Droupadi said, "O lord of men! Therefore, I think that the time for displaying your energy has come. The avaricious sons of Dhritarashtra are always engaged in doing harm. This is not the time to exhibit forgiveness towards
the Kurus. The time has come to show energy, and punishment must be displayed. The mild are always disregarded. But people are careful of those who are harsh. He who knows the right time to employ both of these is a true
lord of the earth."'
