'"The lord said, 'I am again stating the excellent and supreme out of all types of knowledge. Knowing that, all the
sages are freed from this 495 and attain supreme liberation. Seeking refuge in this knowledge and attaining my true
nature, they are not born at the time of creation, nor suffer at the time of destruction. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! The great brahman 496 is my womb. Into that, I place the seed. 497 And from that, all the beings are created. O Kounteya! The different forms that are created in all wombs, the great brahman 498 is like their mother
499 and I am the father who provides the seed. O mighty-armed one! The qualities sattva, rajas and tamas, generated from nature, bind the indestructible atman in the body. O sinless one! Among these, 500 sattva is shining because it is pure and is without sin, but ties down the atman because of attachment to happiness and knowledge. 501
O Kounteya! Know rajas to be based on desire and the origin of thirst and attachment. 502 That 503 binds the atman 504 firmly because of attachment to action. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know tamas to be born from
ignorance and the source of delusion in every being. That 505 binds firmly through error, 506 sloth and sleep. 507
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sattva attaches to happiness and rajas attaches to action. Tamas veils knowledge and attaches to errors. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sattva overcomes rajas and tamas and becomes
strong, rajas, sattva and tamas, and tamas, sattva and rajas. 508 Know that when the light of knowledge is ignited
in all the gates of this body, 509 it is only then that sattva becomes strong. O best of the Bharata lineage! Greed,
510 inclination, beginnings of action, 511 restlessness and desire-these are created when rajas becomes strong. O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! Darkness, lack of enterprise, inadvertence and delusion-these are created when
tamas becomes strong. If a being dies when sattva becomes strong, then he attains the shining 512 world reserved
for those who have the supreme knowledge. Death when rajas become strong leads to rebirth as someone addicted
to action. And death when tamas, 513 leads to rebirth as subhuman species. 514 It has been said that sattva-type
action has the fruit of pure happiness, rajas-type has the fruit of unhappiness and tamas-type has the fruit of ignorance. From sattva, wisdom results, and from rajas, greed, and from tamas, only inadvertence, delusion and ignorance result. Those with a preponderance of sattva ascend above. 515 Those with rajas stay in the middle. 516
Those with despicable tamas qualities, descend below. 517 When the seer doesn't see any agent other than the
qualities and knows that which is beyond the qualities, he attains my nature. 518 When the being transcends the
three qualities that are the origin of the body, he attains immortality, free from birth, death, old age and
unhappiness.'

'"Arjuna said, 'O lord! From what signs does one know one who has transcended? What is his conduct? And
how does he transcend these three qualities?'

'"The lord said, 'O Pandava! He who is engaged in knowledge and inclination and delusion and yet does not
hate, nor desire if these are withdrawn. 519 He is established in indifference and the qualities don't disturb him.
Knowing the action of the qualities to be of this form, he is steady and doesn't waver. Equal between happiness
and unhappiness, established in himself, 520 equal between earth, stone and gold, similar in treatment of the loved
and the hated, tranquil, similar between praise and censure. He who treats respect and insult alike, friend and enemy alike and discards all beginnings of action, 521 he is said to have transcended the qualities.' He who worships
me single-mindedly and with unwavering devotion, he transcends these qualities and is worthy of attaining the
state of the brahman. Because I am the embodiment of the brahman-indestructible, immortal, 522 and also of
eternal dharma and absolute bliss.'"' 523