Vaishampayana said, 'Those brave tigers among men observed great purity and lived there for six nights, hoping to
see Dhananjaya. The Pandavas sported with delight in that beautiful grove that was pleasing to all beings. It had
trees ladened with blossoms and were bent down, burdened with fruit. It was beautiful everywhere, astir with
flocks of male cuckoos. The foliage was tender and uninterrupted. It was cool with shade and charming. There
were beautiful ponds with clear water. There were lotuses and lilies there, making every side dazzling[The text says kamala and utpala. Kamala is lotus in general, while utpala is either a blue lotus or a lily.]. The
Pandavas were delighted at witnessing these beautiful sights there. A fragrant breeze wafted there, pleasant to the
touch. This gladdened the hearts of all the Pandavas, Krishna and the bulls among the brahmanas.

'Then, in accordance with its own wishes, a breeze blew from the north-east. It carried with it a divine lotus with
one thousand petals. Panchali saw that beautiful and pure lotus descend on the ground, redolent with divine fragrance and carried by the wind. O king! The fortunate one approached that pure and supremely fragrant flower and
extremely happily, told Bhimasena, "O Bhima! Look at this divine, dazzling and supreme blossom. It is full of fragrance and has delighted my heart. O destroyer of enemies! I will give this to Dharmaraja. But to satisfy my desire,
get me others, so that I can take them back to the hermitage in Kamyaka. O Partha! If I am your beloved, get them
for me in large numbers. I wish to take them back to the hermitage in Kamyaka." Having addressed these words to
Bhimasena, the unblemished Panchali then took the flower to Dharmaraja.

'Learning about the queen's wishes, the immensely strong Bhima, bull among men, departed, to do that which
would bring pleasure to his beloved. He swiftly left in the direction from which the breeze had carried the flower,
so that he might obtain more flowers. He grasped his bow that was inlaid with gold and arrows that were like the
virulent venom of snakes. He was like an angry king of the animals, or like an elephant in rut. The one with the
strength of his arms wished to do that which would bring pleasure to Droupadi. The strong one was without fear or
delusion and climbed up the mountain.

'It was covered with trees, creepers and lantanas and strewn with blue stones. The destroyer of enemies went up
the sacred mountain, frequented by kinnaras. There were many kinds of minerals, trees and birds of different types.
Adorned with all kinds of ornaments, it seemed to be like an arm of the earth, stretching upwards. Gandhamadana's peak was beautiful everywhere. His eyes and his desires were on it and he thought about it in his heart.
The infinitely valorous one's ears, mind and eyes were fixed on the peaks that resounded to the sounds of male
cuckoos and the humming of bees. The greatly energetic one inhaled the fragrance of the blossom everywhere and
proceeded to climb up Gandhamadana, like a mad elephant in the forest. His father, the cool breeze that blows
from Gandhamadana, took away his exhaustion and fanned by this, his body hair stood up[Bhima was the wind-god's son.]. To obtain the flowers, the destroyer of enemies traversed a region frequented by yakshas, gandharvas, gods and masses of brahmarshis. The clean sides of the mountain were streaked with minerals-golden, black and silver. The patterns were
uneven, as if the mountain had been painted with fingers. With clouds clinging to the sides, the mountain seemed
to be dancing, as if on wings. Because of the gushing of water from streams, it seemed to wear a string of pearls. It
had lovely groves, waterfalls and caverns. Peacocks danced there, in tune with the anklets of apsaras. The elephants that guard the cardinal directions[Eight elephants guard the eight cardinal points.] had rubbed the rocky surface with their tusks. When the water was
swiftly released from the streams and descended, it seemed as if the mountain was loosening its garments. The
deer approached and curiously looked at him, unused to fear, with grass in their mouths. Vayu's son, the handsome
Kounteya, proceeded happily, as if in sport, tearing away many nets of creepers with the force of his thighs. The
one with the beautiful eyes wished to do that which would bring pleasure to his beloved. The youth was as tall as a
golden palm and his body was like that of a lion. He was as strong as a mad elephant and he possessed the speed of
a mad elephant. His copper-hued eyes were like that of a mad elephant and he was capable of withstanding a mad
elephant. Seated by the sides of their beloveds, and invisible to the sight, the wives of yakshas and gandharvas,
watched him and made expressive gestures.

'As if having adopted a new body, Pandava happily ascended Gandhamadana's beautiful peak. He remembered
the many woes that had been inflicted by Duryodhana. Eager to perform the task that the forest-dwelling Droupadi
had given, he thought, "Arjuna has gone to heaven. I have come away to fetch the flowers. What will the arya Yudhishthira do? Out of affection and out of distrust for what is in the forest, Yudhishthira, the best of men, will not
release Nakula and Sahadeva[To search for Bhima.]. How can I obtain the flowers quickly?" Thinking in this way, the tiger among
men travelled with the speed of the king of the birds[Garuda is the king of the birds.]. The earth shook when his feet struck it, like a storm at the
end of an era. The immensely strong Vrikodara's speed frightened herds of elephants, lions, tigers and animals.
The strong one forcefully uprooted many gigantic trees and brushed them aside with his chest. Pandu's son swiftly
tore aside creepers and lantanas, as he climbed higher and higher up the peak of the mountain, like an elephant. He
roared like a monsoon cloud, streaked with lightning. O lord! Awakened by that terrible sound and the twang of his
bow, herds of animals were frightened and fled in all directions.

'On the slopes of the peak of Gandhamadana, the mighty-armed one then saw a beautiful grove of plantain trees
that extended for many yojanas. The immensely strong one swiftly dashed towards it. Like a giant elephant oozing
musth, like the wind among many trees, Bhima, supreme among those who are strong, uprooted the trunks of
many plantain trees that were as large as many palm trees and thrust them aside. There were many large animals,
herds of ruru[A kind of deer.], monkeys, lions, buffaloes and aquatic animals. The lions and tigers were angered and attacked
Bhimasena. They were extremely fearsome. Their jaws gaped and their roars were terrible. But Vayu's son, Bhima,
used the strength of his arms and angrily killed elephants with elephants and lions with lions. The lord, the strong
Pandava, used the palm of his hand to kill others. Thus killed by Bhima, lions, tigers and hyenas crept away fearfully, discharging urine and dung. Pandu's handsome and immensely strong son then swiftly entered the forest and
filled all the directions with his roar. Hearing that terrible roar let out by Bhimasena, all the animals and birds in
the forest were frightened and fled elsewhere. On hearing the sounds of the animals and the birds, thousands of
birds flew up. Their wings were wet with water. On seeing those masses of aquatic birds, the bull among the
Bharata lineage followed them and saw a beautiful and giant lake. Though it was fanned by clumps of golden plantain trees along its shores, stirred by the breeze, it was tranquil. The lake was adorned with many lotuses and lilies.
Descending into the water, the strongest among strong ones sported around, like a gigantic elephant. Having sported there for a long time, the infinitely energetic one climbed out and swiftly entered the forest that was full of
many trees. With the force of his breath, the Pandava blew on his conch shell. The sound of the conch shell, Bhimasena's roars and the terrible sound of the slapping of his arms resounded in the mountainous caverns. Hearing
the loud sound of the slapping, like the roar of thunder, lions that were asleep in the mountainous caverns let out
loud roars. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The roar of the lions frightened the elephants. The great mountain
was filled with their loud trumpeting.

'Hanuman, bull among monkeys, was asleep. On hearing these roars, the monkey, gigantic in form, began to
yawn. He was as gigantic as Indra's flagpole and he had been asleep in that clump of plantain trees. As he yawned,
he lashed the ground with his tail and the sound was like that of Indra's vajra. Like a bellowing cow, on every side,
the mountain echoed from the sound of the tail, through the mouths of the giant caverns. Rising above the sound
created by the mad elephants, the sound of the lashing of the tail spread throughout the colourful peak of the
mountain. On hearing the noise, Bhimasena's body hair stood up. In an attempt to identify the source, he roamed
around the grove of plantain trees. Then the mighty-armed one found the lord of the monkeys in the middle of the
plantain grove, lying down on an elevated and flat slab of stone. He was difficult to look at, like a flash of lightning. He was yellow, like lightning. He looked like a flash of lightning. He was as swift as lightning. His short and
stout head rested on the crook of his arms. Because his shoulders were so large, the waist above his hips seemed to
be slender. His tail was bent at the end and was covered with long hair. It was erect and dazzling, like a banner. His
lips were red and his tongue had the complexion of copper. His ears were red and his brows moved. His face was
like the moon with its beams and the teeth were round and sharp. The inside of the mouth was adorned with white
and dazzling teeth. Above it, the extensive mane looked like a mass of ashoka flowers. The immensely radiant one
was lying down in the midst of the golden plantain trees. His form was as resplendent as a blazing fire and he
looked fearlessly with eyes that were as yellow as honey.

'Bhima, terrible in prowess, swiftly approached that gigantic and supremely powerful one, supreme among
monkeys. He roared like a lion, so that the monkey might be forewarned. At Bhima's roar, the animals and the
birds were frightened. The immensely powerful Hanuman only opened his eyes a little. He looked at him contemptuously, through eyes that were yellow like honey. Smiling, the monkey addressed the human Kounteya. "I was ill
and was happily asleep. Why did you wake me up? Do you not know that it is your duty to show compassion towards all beings? Since we have been born from inferior wombs, we do not know what dharma is. But men have
intelligence and should show compassion towards animals. Why do you commit cruel deeds that cause injury to
the body, speech and heart? They are against dharma. You are blessed with intelligence. You do not know what
dharma is. You have not served old ones. You have limited intelligence and in your childlishness, are injuring animals. Who are you? Tell me. Despite being a man, why have you come to this forest that is shunned by men? From
here onwards, the mountain is insurmountable and inaccessible, except by the siddhas. O brave one! You cannot go
there. O immensely powerful one! I am restraining you out of compassion and friendliness. O lord! You cannot go
beyond this place. If you accept my words, relax and eat these roots and fruit that taste like amrita. Then return."'
