Vaishampayana said, 'While these two intelligent ones were conversing in this way, the night, auspicious with the
nakshatras, passed. The great-souled Vidura was listening to many words about dharma, artha and kama, diverse in
their purport, sentences and syllables, spoken by the infinitely energetic Krishna and he did not desire that the
night should pass. Neither did Krishna. Then, many bards and minstrels with good voices awoke Keshava, to the
sound of conch shells and drums. Dasharha Janardana, bull among all those of the Satvata lineage, arose and performed all the necessary morning ablutions. Having bathed in water, meditating and offering oblations into the fire,
Madhava adorned himself in ornaments and worshipped the rising sun.

'Duryodhana and Shakuni Soubala came to the unvanquished Krishna Dasharha, while he was performing the
morning rites. They told Krishna, "O Govinda! Dhritarashtra has arrived in the assembly hall with all the Kurus,
with Bhishma at the forefront, and all the other kings and lords of the earth. They are waiting for you, like the immortals await Shakra in heaven." Govinda welcomed them with extremely conciliatory words. Then, when the
clear sun had risen, Janardana, the scorcher of enemies, gave the brahmanas gold, garments, cows and horses.
When the unvanquished Dasharha had given many gems and was waiting, his charioteer arrived and greeted him.
On the instructions of the immensely intelligent one, the divine chariot was brought. It roared like a monsoon
cloud and was decorated with every kind of jewel. Janardana circumambulated the fire and the brahmanas. He
donned the Koustubha jewel and was radiant in his supreme prosperity. Surrounded by the Kurus and protected by
the Vrishnis, Shouri Krishna, the joy of all the Yadavas, ascended the chariot. After Dasharha had ascended, Vidu-
ra, knowledgeable in dharma, foremost among all beings and supreme among all those who uphold dharma, also
ascended. Duryodhana and Shakuni Soubala followed Krishna, the scorcher of enemies, on a second chariot.
Satyaki, Kritavarma and maharatha Vrishnis followed Krishna on chariots, horses and elephants. As they travelled,
the beautiful and colourful chariots roared. They were decorated in gold and were yoked to excellent horses. In a
short while, Krishna, resplendent in his wisdom and prosperity, came upon a large road that was frequented by rajarshis. The dust had been swept and it had been sprinkled[With water.]. As Dasharha proceeded, there was continuous music
from drums, conch shells and other musical instruments. Brave and young warriors from all the worlds, scorchers
of enemies and with the valour of lions, surrounded Shouri's chariot as he travelled. Many thousand of others preceded Krishna in colourful and wonderful attire, with swords, spears and other weapons. There were more than
one hundred elephants and thousands of supreme horses that followed the brave and unvanquished Dasharha as he
progressed. The entire city of the Kurus was full of children, women and the aged, who wished to see Janardana,
the scorcher of enemies, arrive on his chariot. There were many women who crowded on the balconies, so that the
foundations seemed to sway under the burden. He proceeded slowly, honoured by the Kurus, listening to the many
words, glancing in all directions and returning the homage to those who should be honoured.

'Keshava and his followers then reached the assembly hall. The sounds of conch shells and flutes filled all the
directions, resounding in the sky. The entire assembly of infinitely energetic kings trembled in delight, desiring
Krishna's arrival. As Krishna neared, the lords of men trembled when they heard the roar of the chariot, with a
noise like that of a monsoon cloud. Shouri, bull among all the Satvatas, reached the gate of the assembly hall and
dismounted from the chariot, which was like Mount Kailasa. Similar to clouds and mountains, it was radiant in its
energy. He entered the assembly hall, which was like the abode of the great Indra. The immensely famous one held
Vidura and Satyaki with his two hands. O king! He overshadowed the Kurus with his radiance, like the sun over
the nakshatras. Karna and Duryodhana were in front of Vasudeva. Kritavarma and the Vrishnis were behind
Krishna. With Dhritarashtra at the forefront, Bhishma, Drona and all the others arose from their seats and honoured
Janardana. When Dasharha arrived, the immensely famous lord of men who possessed wisdom as his sight[Dhritarashtra.] arose,
together with Bhishma, Drona and the others. When the great king Dhritarashtra, lord of men, arose, all the thousands of kings stood up in every direction. On Dhritarashtra's instructions, a golden seat that was excellent in
every way had been prepared for Krishna. Madhava greeted the king, Bhishma and Drona with a smile. The one
with dharma in his soul greeted the other kings in accordance with age. The kings, the lords of the earth and all the
Kurus worshipped Keshava Janardana when he entered the assembly hall. Dasharha, the scorcher of enemies and
the conqueror of enemy cities, stood in the midst of the kings and saw that the rishis had assembled in the sky. On
seeing the rishis, with Narada at the forefront, Dasharha softly told Bhishma, Shantanu's son, "O king! The rishis
have arrived to witness this assembly on earth. They should be invited, offered seats and shown a great deal of honours. No one is capable of being seated as long as they don't have seats. Let the sages, who have controlled their
souls, be immediately worshipped." On seeing the rishis arrive at the gate of the assembly hall, Shantanu's son ordered the servants to quickly bring seats for them. They brought many large and beautiful seats, smooth and decorated with jewels and gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When they had accepted the argha[Gift given to a guest, also arghya.], they seated
themselves. Krishna seated himself, and so did the kings in their respective seats. Duhshasana showed Satyaki his
excellent seat. Vivimshati brought a golden seat for Kritavarma. The great-souled and intolerant Karna and Duryodhana shared the same seat, not far away from Krishna. O lord of the earth! Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, was
protected by all those from Gandhara and sat on a seat, together with his son. Vidura sat on a seat that was crested
with jewels and was covered with white deerskin. His seat touched the seat where the immensely wise Shouri was
seated.

'For a long time, all the kings glanced towards Dasharha. They looked at Janardana, as if they were drinking
amrita, and were not satisfied. Janardana was attired in a yellow garment and had the complexion of an atasi
flower[A small yellow flower of the common flax.]. He sat in the midst of that assembly hall, like a jewel that has been set in gold. With their minds on
Govinda, all of them were seated and silent. Not a man who was there said anything.'
