Vaishampayana said, 'From the signs, Dasharha had understood what
Drona's son intended. The mighty-armed one spoke to Arjuna. "O Arjuna!
O Pandava! O Arjuna! In your mind, you have the knowledge of the divine
weapon that was instructed to you by Drona. The time to use it has arrived.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is needed to save yourself and your
brothers. You should release it, since it is capable of countering all
weapons." Having been thus addressed by Keshava, Pandava, the destroyer
of enemy heroes, swiftly descended from the chariot and grasped his bow
and an arrow. The scorcher of enemies spoke words of welfare, addressed to
his preceptor's son, then to himself and all his brothers. He bowed to the
gods and all his preceptors. Meditating and pronouncing auspicious words,
he released that weapon, so as to pacify the other weapon. That weapon was
violently released by the wielder of Gandiva. It blazed with great flames,
like the fire that arises at the end of a yuga. In a similar way, the weapon released by Drona's son was fierce in its energy. It blazed in great flames, surrounded by a disc of energy. There were many peals of thunder and thousands of meteors fell down. A great fear was generated in all the beings.
The firmament was enveloped in that great noise and seemed to be covered
in a terrible garland of fire. The entire earth, with its mountains, forests and
trees, trembled. That weapon was stationed there, scorching the worlds with
its energy. The two maharshis, Narada, with dharma in his soul, and the
grandfather of the Bharatas[Vedavyasa.], showed themselves then. They sought to
pacify the two brave ones, Bharadvaja's descendant and Dhananjaya. Those
two sages were learned in all forms of dharma and had the welfare of all beings in mind. Those two supremely energetic ones stationed themselves between those two flaming weapons. Those two illustrious and supreme rishis
were incapable of being assailed by anything and were like two blazing
fires themselves. They could not be touched by any living being and they
were revered by the gods and the danavas. For the sake of the welfare of the
worlds, they pacified the energies of the weapons.

'The two rishis said, "The maharathas who have fallen down earlier were
knowledgeable about many weapons. These weapons should never be used
against humans. Why have you invoked them?"'
