'Sanjaya said, "Just as the illustrious Krishna Dvaipayana Vyasa had said, in that fashion, all the lords of the earth
assembled for the encounter. On that day, the moon approached Magha. 33 The seven large and blazing planets 34
appeared in the sky. When the sun arose, it seemed to be divided into two parts. When the blazing sun arose in the
sky, it had a flaming crest. The directions blazed. Desiring to feed on bodies, flesh and blood, jackals and crows
cried out. Each day, the aged grandfather of the Kurus and Bharadvaja's son arose and with concentration, wished
that the Parthas might not be killed and that the sons of Pandu might be victorious. Those undecaying scorchers of
enemies fought for your sake only because they had taken a pledge. Your father, Devavrata, was knowledgeable
about every aspect of dharma. He summoned all the lords of the earth and spoke these words to them. 'O kshatriyas! This great door that leads to heaven has been opened up. Pass through it and go the worlds of Shakra and
Brahma. 35 This is the eternal path, indicated by the ancient ones, and those who have preceded them. Honour
yourselves by fighting with great attention. Through such deeds, Nabhaga, Yayati, Mandhata, Nahusha and Nriga
have been successful and have reached the supreme goal. It is adharma for a kshatriya to die from disease in his
home. The eternal dharma is to die in the field of battle.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having been thus addressed by Bhishma, all the lords of the earth went to the heads of their armies and were resplendent in their
supreme chariots. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But because of Bhishma, Vaikartana Karna, together with his
advisers and relatives, cast aside his weapons in that battle. Without Karna, your sons and all the kings on your
side marched out. They roared like lions and this resounded in the ten directions. There were white umbrellas and
flags and pennants, elephants and horses. With charioteers, chariots and infantry, the army was splendid. There was
the sound of drums and cymbals and also the noise of kettledrums. The earth trembled because of the roar of the
wheels of chariots. The maharathas had golden armlets and bracelets and bows. They were as radiant as mobile
mountains.

'"Bhishma's standard had a large palm tree with five stars. The general of the Kuru army was like the clear sun.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! As instructed by Shantanu's son, all the kings and great archers who
were on your side stationed themselves. With all the kings, Shaibya Govasana 36 advanced on a king among elephants that was bedecked with flags and deserved to carry kings. Ashvatthama, whose complexion was like the lotus, was at the head of all the soldiers. He was ready and his standard was adorned with a lion's tail. Shrutayudha,
Chitrasena, Purumitra, Vivimshati, Shalya, Bhurishrava, maharatha Vikarna-these seven great archers were
adorned in excellent armour. They rode their chariots and followed Drona's son, ahead of Bhishma. Their great
standards were resplendent on their supreme chariots. The golden flags were seen to be blazing. Drona, foremost
among preceptors, had a golden altar on his standard, adorned with a water pot and the sign of a bow. Duryodhana's large standard had a bejewelled elephant and led hundreds and thousands of soldiers. Pourava, Kalinga, Su-
dakshina from Kamboja, Kshemadhanva, Sumitra and other rathas were in front of him. 37 The king of Magadha
guided the forces from the front, on an extremely expensive chariot that bore the standard of a bull. He was protected by the lord of Anga 38 and the great-souled Kripa. That extremely large army from the east looked like scattered autumn clouds. The immensely famous Jayadratha stationed himself at the forefront of the soldiers. 39 He
had a beautiful silver standard, marked with the sign of a boar. A hundred thousand chariots, eight thousand elephants and sixty thousand horses were under his command. O king! Commanded by the lord of Sindhu, foremost
among standard bearers, that large army was resplendent with chariots, elephants and horses. Together with Ketu-
mat, the lord of all the Kalingas advanced with sixty thousand chariots and ten thousand elephants. His large elephants were like mountains. They were adorned with implements of war, 40 spears, quivers and standards and
were beautiful. Kalinga was resplendent with a standard that bore the sign of a tree. He had a white umbrella and
golden whisks. O king! Ketumat was also on an elephant, with a colourful and supreme goad. 41 He was stationed
in that battle, like the sun amidst clouds. King Bhagadatta was stationed on a supreme elephant and was radiant in
his energy. He was like the wielder of the vajra. Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti were regarded as Bhagadatta's
equal. They rode on the shoulders of elephants and followed Ketumat. O king! Instructed by Drona, the king who
was Shantanu's son, the son of the preceptor, 42 Bahlika and Kripa, the arrays of chariots were arranged in vyuhas
43 with excellent heads. The elephants were the body. The horses were the sides. That fierce formation was ready
to descend and attack on all sides."'
