Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Yudhishthira was protected by Shini's descendant and by the brave sons of Droupadi, Drona's son cheerfully attacked him. He showered large numbers of gold-tufted and fierce arrows that had been
sharpened on stone. He displayed many different kinds of motion, his learning and the dexterity of his hands. The
one who was learned in the use of weapons invoked his arrows with the mantras of divine weapons and surrounded
Yudhishthira in the battle. Everything was shrouded by the arrows of Drona's son and nothing could be seen. It
was as if the heads of all the warriors were covered by arrows. The firmament was covered by a net of arrows and
seemed to be shrouded by a golden net. O best of the Bharata lineage! It was beautiful, as if it had been covered
with a canopy. O king! In that battle, enveloped by that radiant net of arrows, the sky seemed to be obstructed by
arrows, as if by the shadow of clouds. Because of the arrows, the sight that we beheld there was extraordinary. As
a result of the valour of Drona's son, nothing could be seen to descend on earth[Beings like birds could not descend from the sky to the earth.]. O great king! On beholding
the dexterity of Drona's son, the maharathas there were astounded and were incapable of glancing at him. It was as
if all the kings were being scorched by the sun.

' "Though Satyaki, Dharmaraja Pandava and the other soldiers made efforts, they could not withstand his valour.
When the soldiers were being slaughtered, Droupadi's maharatha sons, Satyaki, Dharmaraja and the Panchalas
united, abandoning their fear of death and fiercely attacked Drona's son. Satyaki pierced Drona's son with twentyfive arrows with stone heads. He again pierced him with seven iron arrows that were decorated with gold. Yudhishthira struck him with seventy-three, Prativindhya with seven, Shrutakarma with three arrows, Shrutakirti with
seven arrows, Sutasoma with nine and Shatanika with nine[These are the names of Droupadi's sons, Prativindhya through Yudhishthira, Sutasoma through Bhima, Shrutakarma through Arjuna,
Shatanika through Nakula and Shrutasena through Sahadeva. Shrutakarma and Shrutakirti should be the same, in which case, the text should say
Shrutasena (Sahadeva's son) instead of Shrutakirti.]. Many other brave ones pierced him from all directions. O king! He became angry at this and sighed like a venomous serpent. He pierced Satyaki back with twentyfive arrows that had been sharpened on stone, Shrutakirti with nine, Sutasoma with five, Shrutakarma with eight
and Prativindhya with three arrows. He struck Shatanika with nine arrows and Dharma's son[Yudhishthira.] with seven. He
struck each of the other brave ones with two arrows each. With sharp arrows, he severed Shrutakirti's bow. At this,
maharatha Shrutakirti picked up another bow and pierced Drona's son with three arrows, following this up by
striking him with many other sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona's son showered down arrows and covered the soldiers and the kings from every direction with arrows. Drona's son, immeasurable in his
soul, again severed Dharmaraja's bow with three sharp arrows and laughed. O king! At this, Dharma's son picked
up another giant bow and struck Drona's son in the arms and the chest with seventy arrows. In the battle, Satyaki
angrily struck Drona's son and used an extremely sharp arrow that was in the form of a half-moon to sever his
bow. Having done this, he roared loudly. With his bow severed, Drona's son, supreme among strong ones, hurled a
lance and swiftly brought down the charioteer of Shini's descendant from his chariot. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Drona's powerful son then picked up another bow and enveloped Shini's descendant with a shower of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With his[Satyaki's.] charioteer brought down in the encounter, his horses were
seen to run around here and there. With Yudhishthira at the forefront, they[The Pandava soldiers.] powerfully attacked Drona's son,
supreme among the wielders of weapons, and showered down sharp arrows. In that great battle, on seeing that they
were rushing to the attack and adopting fierce forms, Drona's son, scorcher of enemies, laughed and received them.
In that battle, Drona's maharatha son used hundreds of flaming arrows to consume the flanks of the soldiers, like a
fire burning dead wood in the forest. O foremost among the Bharatas! The army of Pandu's son was afflicted by
Drona's son, like the mouth of a river by a whale. O great king! On witnessing the valour of Drona's son, everyone
thought that the Pandus had already been slain by Drona's son.

' "Spiritedly approaching Drona's maharatha son, Yudhishthira spoke to Drona's son, anger and intolerance
flooding his mind. 'O tiger among men! Since you wish to kill me today, your name is not affection, nor is your
name gratitude. A brahmana's task is austerities, donations and studying and a bow should be stretched by a kshatriya. You say that you are a brahmana. O mighty-armed one! While you look on, I will vanquish the Kouravas in
the battle.' O great king! Having been thus addressed, Drona's son smiled. He thought about what was proper and
did not say anything in reply. Without saying anything, he showered arrows on Pandava and enveloped him in the
battle, like an angry Yama against beings. O venerable one! Having been thus shrouded by Drona's son, Partha
abandoned that large army and swiftly departed from the spot. O king! Dharma's son, Yudhishthira, departed.
However, Drona's great-minded son still remained stationed in that region. Thus, King Yudhishthira abandoned
Drona's son in the great battle and advanced against your soldiers, having decided to perform cruel deeds." '
