Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O tiger among the Kurus! You should explain to me about the kinds of
brahmanas who should get gifts at funeral ceremonies."

'Bhishma replied, "A kshatriya who knows about dana dharma must examine brahmanas. It has been said that in
rites connected with the gods and the ancestors, one must lawfully undertake this scrutiny. When the gods are worshipped, it is the energy of the gods that is used. A man receives this and uses it to worship the gods. O great king!
At a funeral ceremony, one must examine the brahmanas for lineage, conduct, age, beauty, learning and nobility.
There are some who are polluted and tainted. Others purify taints. O king! Listen. I will recount the ones who
should be barred from the line[At a funeral ceremony, when brahmanas are fed, they are seated along a row or line. Those who are inferior are
not allowed to sit together with the others and sit separately. They are effectively outcasts among brahmanas.]-one who is deceitful; one guilty of foeticide; one with tuberculosis; one engaged
in animal husbandry; one who has not read the Vedas[Alternatively, one who neglects his duties.]; one who works as a servant in a village; one who lives on
the interest of moneylending; one who is a singer; one who sells everything; an arsonist; a poisoner; a pimp; one
who sells soma; a palmist; one who is the servant of a king; a seller of oil; a cheat; one who quarrels with his father; one who allows his wife's lover to dwell in his own house; one who has been cursed; a thief; one who earns a
living as an artisan; one who sells baskets on festive occasions; one who injures his friends; one who has intercourse with someone else's wife; one who teaches those who don't observe vows; the husband of a courtesan[Alternatively, one who earns a living by selling weapons.];
one who roams around in the company of dogs; one who has been bitten by a dog; one who has married before his
elder brother; a leper; one who has had intercourse with his preceptor's wife; an actor; one who makes a living off
idols; and one who makes a living by studying the nakshatras. Know that such brahmanas are inferior and should
not be allowed to sit in the same line. In addition, there are those of limited intelligence who offer instructions to
shudras. O king! If they are seated alongside, the entire line is polluted. A one-eyed[Alternatively, blind.] person pollutes sixty[Seated along the same row.], an
impotent person pollutes one hundred and one with white leprosy pollutes as many as he looks at. If a person
eats[At a funeral ceremony.] with his head covered in cloth, if he eats facing a southern direction, or if he eats with his footwear on, all
the resultant learning is obtained by the asuras. If anything is given with malice and if anything is given without
devotion, Brahma has thought of all of these as shares belonging to Indras among the asuras. The spot where funeral offerings are given should be surrounded and covered with sesamum seeds. Dogs and brahmanas who are not
allowed to sit in the same line should not look at these. If this is not done, all the sesamum seed and oblations are
stolen by predatory beasts, krodavashas, yatudhanas and pishachas[Different types of demons.]. If a brahmana is not allowed to sit and eat in
the same line, but does it, then the fruits of the foolish donor are destroyed, proportionate to the number of individuals along the line that the offending brahmana looks at.

'"O best among the Bharata lineage! Know that these are the ones who sanctify the line[The line for eating the food, not the lineage.]. I will tell you the
truth about this. Examine brahmanas. All the brahmanas who possess learning about the Vedas and have bathed
themselves in vows are ones who can eat in the same line. I will tell you about them. Know that they are the sancti-
fiers of the line-one who knows about the three Nachiketa fires[Yama taught Nachiketa about the sacrificial fire. The three probably refers to the three days he waited in Yama's
house and the three boons he obtained from Yama. Every act in a funeral ceremony is performed thrice. The sutra literature suggests that this should be understood as the three texts that talk about the Nachiketa fire.]; one who knows about the five sacrificial fires;
one who knows the three Suparnas[Probably meaning three specific verses with the word Suparna.]; one who knows the six Vedangas; one who is the descendant of ancestors
who knew about the brahman; one who knows about metres; one who knows about Jyeshtha Sama[Specific name of a Sama hymn.]; one who is
obedient to his mother and his father; one whose ancestors have been learned for ten generations; one who always
has intercourse with his lawful wife when she is in season; one who is learned in the Vedas; and one who has
bathed himself in vows. Such a brahmana deserves to sit in the line. A person who has studied Atharvashirasa[While this clearly refers to the Atharva Veda, many Atharvashirasa texts are of much later vintage.], a
brahmachari, a person who is rigid in his vows, one who is truthful in speech, one who possesses dharma and good
conduct, one who is devoted to his own tasks, one who has made the efforts to bathe in the sacred tirthas, one who
has successfully bathed after having completed a sacrifice with mantras, one without anger, one who isn't fickle,
one who is forgiving, one who is self-restrained, one who has conquered his senses and one who is engaged in the
welfare of all beings-this is the kind of person who should be invited to a funeral ceremony. These are the ones
who sanctify the line. If one donates to them, the fruits are inexhaustible. O great king! In addition, know that there
are others who also sanctify the line-ascetics, those who know about the dharma of moksha, those who follow the
vows of yoga well, those who make efforts to make the best of brahmanas listen to itihasa, those who know about
commentaries, those who are devoted to studying grammar, those who have studied the Puranas and the sacred
texts of dharma, those who have studied nyaya, those who follow the rituals properly, those who have lived in the
households of their preceptors, those who are truthful, those who have donated to thousands and those who are
foremost in their knowledge of all the Vedas and all the aphorisms. They are the sanctifiers of the line. They are
said to sanctify the line for as far as they can see. Learned ones who know about the brahman and are the descendants of those who know about the brahman sanctify for a distance of one-third of a krosha[Measure of distance. There are four kroshas in a yojana, but the length of a yojana varies.]. If a person is not an
officiating priest or an instructor and takes the front seat, even if this is with the permission of the officiating
priests, then he appropriates the evil deeds of all the people who are seated along that line. O king! However, if he
is knowledgable about all the Vedas and is devoid of taints that cause pollution to the line, he is not regarded as
fallen. He is one who sanctifies the line. Therefore, before inviting brahmanas, every effort must be made to examine them to see that they are engaged in their own tasks, are self-controlled, born in noble lineages and are extremely learned.

'"A person who performs a funeral ceremony and primarily feeds the offerings to his friends does not please the
ancestors and the gods. He does not go to heaven. If a person performs a funeral ceremony only for the purpose of
getting some people together, he does not walk along the path of the gods. If a person performs a funeral ceremony
for the sake of his friends, he is not freed from the bondage of the senses. He is dislodged from the world of heaven. Therefore, friends must not be honoured at funeral ceremonies. The stored riches can be given to them on other
occasions. Food, havya and kavya should be offered to those who are neutrals, not to those who are thought of as
enemies or friends. Seed that is sown on barren ground does not sprout. Nor does a person who hasn't sowed, benefit from the sprouting of the seed. In that way, if undeserving people eat at a funeral ceremony, no fruits are obtained, in this world or in the next. A brahmana who doesn't study is like a fire that is kindled with straw. It is pacified. Similarly, at a funeral ceremony, one shouldn't give to the undeserving. That is like libations poured onto ashes. There is something named sombhajani[This means eating together. It is difficult to understand what it means in the present context. It probably means
the polluting and the non-polluting eating together, in the same line.]. That is like giving dakshina to pishachas. The gods or the ancestors
do not receive anything from it. Instead, it[The gifts or dakshina.] wanders around on earth, like a cow that has lost its calf and is wandering around from one pen to another, searching. The gods and the ancestors receive nothing, like ghee that has
been poured into a fire that has been pacified. It is no different from dakshina given to dancers and actors, or to
those who are inferior. When dakshina is given to an inferior person, both the donor and the recipient suffer. These
are censured and lead to misfortune and downfall of the ancestors from their divine states. O Yudhishthira! The
learned know that brahmanas are those who always follow the injunctions laid down by the rishis. They are certain
in their knowledge of all kinds of dharma and the gods. They are devoted to studying. They are devoted to learning. They are devoted to austerities. They are devoted to rites. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They should
be understood to be rishis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For benefit, the kavya should be given to those
who are devoted to knowledge. Those brahmanas are supreme and should never be censured. Those who censure
them and slander them should not be fed at funeral ceremonies. O king! A person who censures such brahmanas
destroys three generations of his lineage. O king! This has been heard to be the words of the Vaikhanasa rishis.
Brahmanas should be examined from a distance to see whether they are learned about the Vedas. Whether one
likes them or dislikes them, they are the ones who should be invited to a funeral ceremony. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! It is better for a man to cheerfully feed a single brahmana who knows about the mantras than
thousands and thousands of inferior ones."'
