Vaishampayana said, 'The Pandavas lived comfortably on that mountain. When the rakshasas and Bhimasena's
son[Ghatotkacha.] had left, and they were without Bhimasena, who had gone to roam around as he willed, a rakshasa abducted
Dharmaraja, the twins and Krishna[Droupadi.]. He had pretended to be a brahmana skilled in mantras and well versed in
weapons. Having said this, he had served the Pandavas every day. He lived with the Parthas, covetous of their
quivers and bows and waited for his chance. He was known by the name of Jatasura. When Bhimsena, the destroyer of enemies, went out to hunt, he assumed a different form. It was distorted, terrible and gigantic. Having grasped
all the weapons and seizing Droupadi and the three Pandavas, he fled. But with a great deal of effort, Pandava Sahadeva extricated himself. Shouting for Bhimasena, he ran in the direction that the immensely strong one had
taken.

'While he was thus being abducted, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira told him, "O stupid one! Dharma declines in you,
but you do not see it. Whether one is a human or whether one belongs to inferior species, the gandharvas, the yak-
shas and the rakshasas, birds and animals, draw their sustenance from humans and so do you. If there is prosperity
in our world, there is prosperity in your world too. If our world suffers, the gods suffer along with us. They prosper
through worship and oblations to the gods and the ancestors[Havya is oblations offered to the gods, kavya is oblations offered to the
ancestors.], offered through rituals. O rakshasa! We are the
guardians and the protectors of the kingdom. If kingdoms are unprotected, how can there be prosperity? How can
there be happiness? Unless there has been an act of injury, no rakshasa should ever harm a king. O one who lives
off men! We have not committed the least bit of injury. One should never injure friends and those who are trustful,
those whose food has been partaken of and those who have provided shelter. You found shelter with us. We
showed you honour and you lived happily. O one who is not wise! Having partaken of our food, how can you
abduct us? Since your conduct is fruitless, your age is fruitless and your intelligence is fruitless, you deserve a
fruitless death-and these words will not be fruitless today. If you are truly evil-minded and devoid of all dharma,
then return our weapons and win Droupadi after vanquishing us in battle. But if you are driven by ignorance in
your mind and persist in performing this act, you will follow that which is not dharma and will only obtain ill fame
in this world. O rakshasa! You have today laid your hands on this human woman. It is as if you have stirred up a
vessel and drunk poison from it." Then Yudhishthira bore down heavily on him and oppressed by this weight, he[Jatasura.]
could not travel very fast.

'Yudhishthira told Nakula and Droupadi, "Do not be frightened of this stupid rakshasa. I have robbed him of his
speed. Pavana's mighty-armed son cannot be far away[Bhima was the son of the wind-god, Pavana or Vayu.]. He will arrive in an instant and the rakshasa will have no
future." O king! On seeing that the rakshasa was deluded of his intelligence, Sahadeva spoke to Kunti's son, Yudhishthira. "O king! Nothing brings greater merit to a kshatriya than to fall in the field of battle and give up his life,
or triumph over an enemy. O scorcher of enemies! Let us fight him in the field of battle. Either he will kill us, or
we will kill him. O mighty-armed one! O king! The time and the place are right. O one for whom valour is truth!
The time has come to show the dharma of kshatriyas. Whether we triumph or whether we are slain, we will attain
the supreme objective. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If the rakshasa is still alive when the sun sets, I will
no longer be able to say that I am a kshatriya. O rakshasa! Stop! I am Pandava Sahadeva. Either kill me and take
them today, or fall senseless." While he was speaking thus, Bhimasena appeared by chance. The mighty-armed one
looked like Vasava[Indra.] with his vajra. He saw his two brothers and the famous Droupadi, and Sahadeva on the
ground, challenging the rakshasa. He saw the stupid rakshasa, who had lost his path, his intelligence having been
robbed by time. Driven by destiny, he was roaming around here and there.

'On seeing his brothers and Droupadi being thus abducted, the mighty-armed Bhima was overcome with rage
and told the rakshasa, "I had got to know about you earlier, when I saw you scrutinize our weapons. But though I
did not have my trust in you, I did not kill you then. You were in the form of a brahmana and you had not uttered
any unpleasant words towards us. You did what brought us pleasure and you did nothing that brought us displeasure. You were in the form of an innocent brahmana who was a guest. Anyone who kills such a person, even if he
knows him to be a rakshasa, goes to hell. That apart, the time for your killing was not ripe. That time is ripe now,
since your inclination is of this nature. Extraordinary destiny has made you abduct Krishna. You have swallowed
the hook that stretches from the line of fate, like a fish in the water. How will you escape from me today? You will
not be able to reach the region you have left for and where your mind has already gone. You will not be able to
reach and you will traverse the path travelled by Baka and Hidimba[Baka and Hidimba are rakshasas who were killed by Bhima earlier.]." The rakshasa was driven by destiny. Having
been thus addressed by Bhima, he was frightened and threw them all down[Threw down Yudhishthira, Nakula and Droupadi.]. Then he approached, so as to fight.
His lips trembling in anger, he told Bhima, "O deluded one! I did not lose my directions because I was deluded. I
was waiting for your sake. I have heard about the rakshasas whom you killed in battle. With your blood, I will offer funeral oblations to them today." Having been thus addressed, Bhima smilingly licked the corners of his mouth.
He was bursting with rage, like time and death personified.

'With great force, he dashed at the rakshasa, to engage him in a bout of wrestling. On seeing that Bhima stood
ready to fight, the rakshasa also forcefully dashed towards him, like Bali towards the wielder of the vajra[Bala was a demon killed by Indra. The text should actually say Bala, not Bali.]. When
they were about to engage in that terrible battle with arms, Madri's two sons[Nakula and Sahadeva.] were also extremely angered and
rushed forward. But Vrikodara, Kunti's son, laughingly restrained them. He said, "Behold. I am capable of handling this rakshasa. O king[Addressing Yudhishthira.]! By myself, with my brothers, by the dharma that I have observed well and by my
oblations, I swear that I will finish off this rakshasa." Having said this, the two brave ones challenged each other.
The rakshasa and Vrikodara grasped each other with their arms. They did not spare each other. Angrily, Bhima and
the rakshasa engaged each other in a terrible battle, like a god and a danava. Uprooting trees, the two immensely
strong ones hurled them at each other, roaring like clouds when the summer season is over. Those two, supreme
among strong ones, shattered the trunks of trees with the force of their thighs. They rushed at each other, each desirous of victory. The duel with trees went too, causing the destruction of many large trees, like that ancient battle
between the brothers Vali and Sugriva, lions among apes[The Vali and Sugriva story is from the Ramayana, though the Mahabharata also
mentions it, such as in Section 33.]. For some time, they repeatedly hurled trees at each
other and struck each other, continuously roaring. When all the trees in the region had been torn down, and in an
attempt to kill each other they had reduced them to hundreds of heaps, they immediately took up rocks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those two immensely strong ones fought, like a king of mountains fighting with
clouds. Those hard and terrible rocks flew around, like the vajra. They repeatedly struck each other with these.
They were insolent because of their strength. After this, they rushed at each other and grasped each other with their
arms, tugging like elephants. They struck each other with extremely terrible fists. The two great-souled ones raised
a noise by gnashing their teeth. Then Bhima clenched his fist, like a serpent with five heads, and struck the rakshasa's neck with great force. The rakshasa was exhausted from the force of Bhimasena's blow with the fist. On
seeing this, Bhimasena grasped the one who was extremely tired. The mighty-armed one, equal to the immortals,
raised him up in his two arms. With great force, Bhima then flung him down on the ground. Pandava shattered all
his limbs. Holding him with his elbow, he detached the head from the trunk. As a result of Bhimasena's force, Jata-
sura's head was severed and fell down on the ground, drenched in blood, the eyes bulging and the teeth clenched,
like a fruit dislodged from a tree. Having killed him, the mighty archer went to Yudhishthira. The foremost among
brahmanas praised him, like the Maruts praise Vasava.'
