'Sanjaya said, "O king! In that battle, Bhuri descended on Shini's descendant, who was supreme among rathas and
was advancing like an elephant towards water. Satyaki became angry. He used five sharp arrows to quickly pierce
him in the heart and blood began to flow. Shini's descendant was indomitable in battle. But in that fashion, in that
encounter, Kourava pierced him between the arms with ten sharp arrows. O great king! They wounded each other
with terrible arrows. Their eyes were red with rage and they stretched their bows in anger. O great king! An extremely terrible shower of arrows rained down. Both of them were as angry as Death and released them from their
bows. O king! They stationed themselves in that battle and shrouded each other with arrows. For a short while, the
battle between the two seemed to be equal. O great king! However, extremely wrathful, Shini's descendant
laughed in that battle and severed the bow of the great-souled Kourava. Once the bow had been severed, he asked
him to wait and quickly pierced him in the heart with nine sharp arrows. The scorcher of enemies was thus pierced
by his powerful enemy. He grasped another bow and pierced Satvata back. O lord of the earth! Having pierced Sat-
vata with three arrows, he used an extremely sharp broad-headed arrow to sever his bow and seemed to be smiling.
O great king! With his bow severed, Satyaki became senseless with rage. He hurled an extremely forceful spear
towards his chest. His limbs were shattered by that spear and he fell down from his supreme chariot. His limbs
were red, like the one with the blazing rays in the sky[Since the colour is red, this refers to the setting sun. Mars is also possible, though less likely.].

'"On seeing that the brave one had been killed in that encounter, maharatha Ashvatthama forcefully advanced
towards Shini's descendant. He brought down a torrent of arrows, like clouds showering down rain on Meru. O
king! On seeing that he was angrily advancing towards the chariot of Shini's descendant, maharatha Ghatotkacha
let out a roar and spoke these words. 'O Drona's son! Wait. You will not escape from me with your life. I will kill
you today, like King Skanda killed Mahisha[Mahisha (or Mahishasura) was a demon (asura) in the form of a buffalo. More commonly, Mahishasura is believed to have been killed by Durga (Parvati). Clearly, there was a parallel myth connected with Skanda.]. In the forefront of this battle, I will kill you today and destroy the
love you bear towards fighting.' Having spoken thus, the rakshasa, the destroyer of enemy heroes, angrily attacked
Drona's son, like a lion against a king of elephants. His eyes were coppery red with rage. Ghatotkacha showered
down arrows that were as long as a chariot's axle. Like clouds pouring down rain, he shrouded Drona's son, bull
among rathas. But, in that battle, Drona's son quickly used his own arrows to counter those arrows, which were
like venomous serpents, before they could reach him. He then used hundreds of sharp and swift arrows that were
capable of penetrating the inner organs against Ghatotkacha, the scorcher of enemies and an Indra among rakshasas. O great king! Pierced by those arrows, the rakshasa looked beautiful in the forefront of the battle, like a
porcupine with its quills erect. Bhimasena's powerful son was overcome with rage. He showered down fierce arrows on Drona's son and they had the sound of the vajra and thunder. There were kshurapras and those that were in
the shape of a half-moon. There were those with iron heads. Some had tufts like a boar's ear. Others were hollow
and sharp. Still others had barbed tufts. That tumultuous shower of arrows made a sound like the vajra and thunder.
They were angrily released and descended on him. However, the senses of Drona's son were not numbed. That torrent of arrows was extremely difficult to withstand. However, the immensely energetic one invoked a divine
weapon with a mantra and drove them away, like the wind dispelling large clouds. The arrows seemed to be fighting with each other in the sky. O great king! They were terrible in form and this increased the joy of the warriors.
Because of the friction among the weapons, sparks were generated in every direction. At the commencement of the
night, the sky seemed to be covered with fireflies. Drona's son covered all the directions with his arrows. To ensure
the welfare of your sons, he countered the rakshasa.

'"In the battle, there was a duel between Drona's son and the rakshasa. In the midst of that dark night, it was like
that between Shakra and Prahlada. In that battle, Ghatotkacha was filled with extreme rage. He struck Drona's son
in the chest with ten arrows that were like the fire of destruction. Having been pierced in that battle by the rakshasa, Drona's immensely strong son wavered, like a tree struck by a storm. He lost his senses and grasped the
pole of his standard. O lord of men! Sounds of lamentation arose among all your soldiers. O lord of the earth! All
those on your side thought that he had been killed. In that battle, on seeing that Ashvatthama was in that state, the
Panchalas and Srinjayas roared like lions. Having regained his senses, the immensely strong Ashvatthama, the
scorcher of enemies, drew his bow with his left hand. He drew the bow back up to his ear and quickly aimed a terrible and supreme arrow towards Ghatotkacha. It was like Yama's staff. O lord of the earth! That supreme and
fierce arrow, with excellent tufts, pierced the rakshasa's heart and then entered the ground. O great king! Thus
pierced by Drona's son, who prided himself in battle, the Indra among rakshasas, who was extremely strong, sank
down on the floor of his chariot. On seeing that Hidimba's son was senseless in that field of battle, his charioteer
was terrified and quickly bore him away from Drona's son. Having thus pierced Ghatotkacha, Indra among rakshasas, in the battle, Drona's immensely strong son let out a mighty roar. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
was honoured by your sons and by all the warriors. His body blazed, like the sun at midday.

'"Bhimasena was fighting in the vicinity of the chariot of Bharadvaja's son. King Duryodhana himself pierced
him back with sharp arrows. O venerable one! Bhimasena pierced him with nine arrows. Duryodhana pierced him
back with twenty arrows. Shrouded by arrows in the forefront of that battle, they looked like the moon and the sun
in the sky, when they are covered by a net of clouds. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Asking Bhima to
wait, King Duryodhana pierced him with five arrows. Bhima severed his bow and his standard with nine arrows.
He pierced the best of the Kouravas with ninety arrows with straight tufts. O venerable one! Duryodhana became
angry with Bhimasena. O king! While all the archers looked on, he shot arrows[The Critical edition excises a shloka where Duryodhana picks up another bow.]. Bhima repulsed all the arrows
that were released from Duryodhana's bow. He struck Kourava with twenty-five small arrows. O venerable one!
Duryodhana became angry with Bhimasena. He severed his bow with a kshurapra arrow and pierced him back
with ten arrows. The immensely strong Bhimasena picked up another bow. He swiftly pierced the king with seven
sharp arrows. Showing the dexterity of his hands, he[Duryodhana.] severed his bow quickly and then a second, a third, a
fourth and a fifth. O great king! Full of himself, he severed all the bows Bhima picked up. O great king! Your son
was insolent about his prowess and wished for victory. On seeing that the bows were repeatedly severed, in that
battle, he[Bhima.] then hurled a sparkling lance that was made completely out of iron. But before that lance could reach
him, Kourava severed it into three fragments, while all the worlds and the great-souled Bhima looked on. O great
king! At this, Bhima grasped a heavy club that was extremely radiant. Powerfully, he hurled it towards Duryodhana's chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, the heavy club forcefully crushed your son's
horses and charioteer. O Indra among kings! It also destroyed your son's chariot, decorated with gold. He quickly
descended from his chariot and ascended that of the great-souled Nandaka[One of Duryodhana's brothers.].

'"Bhima thought that your maharatha son[Duryodhana.] had been killed. He roared loudly like a lion and challenged the
Kouravas. Your soldiers also thought that the king had been killed. In every direction, sounds of lamentation arose.
On hearing those lamentations, all the warriors were frightened. O king! On hearing Bhimasena's roar, the great-
souled King Yudhishthira thought that Suyodhana had been killed. He speedily rushed to the spot where Partha
Vrikodara was. O lord of the earth! Wishing to fight with Drona, the Panchalas, Kekayas, Matsyas and Srinjayas
made their efforts and speedily advanced against him. A great battle commenced between Drona and the enemy.
Everything was immersed in fierce darkness and they started to kill each other."'
