Vaishampayana said, 'The best of sages, Narada, Parvata and the immensely ascetic Devala came there to see
the  king.  So  did  Dvaipayana  and  his  disciples,  other  learned  siddhas  and  the  aged  rajarshi,  Shatayupa,
supremely devoted to dharma. O great king! Following the prescribed rites, Kunti worshipped them. Those ascetics were satisfied with this service. O son! Those supreme rishis engaged in conversations about dharma. This
delighted the great-souled king, Dhritarashtra. Narada could see everything directly. On one such occasion, at the
end of the conversation, the devarshi told all of them this account. "In ancient times, there was a fearless king who
was Prajapati's equal. He was known as Sahasrachitya and he was Shatayupa's grandfather. His eldest son was
supremely devoted to dharma. Handing over the kingdom to him, King Sahasrachitya, with dharma in his soul, entered the forest. Having transcended all the supreme austerities, the resplendent and great-minded king obtained
Purandara's region. O king! On many occasions, on my visits there, I have seen the king engaged in austerities in
the great Indra's abode, having burnt down his sins. In that way, King Shailalaya, King Bhagadatta's grandfather,
went to the great Indra's abode through the strength of his austerities. There was also a king named Prishaghna,
equal to the wielder of the vajra himself. Through his austerities, that king obtained the vault of heaven. O king! It
was in this forest that King Purukutsa[Purukutsa's story is primarily related in the Vishnu Purana.], Mandhata's son, obtained great success. Narmada, supreme among rivers,
became his wife. It was in this forest that the king tormented himself through austerities and went to heaven. There
was a king named Shashaloma and he was supremely devoted to dharma. It was in this forest that he tormented
himself through austerities and obtained heaven. O king! You have come to this hermitage. Through Dvaipayana's
favours, you will obtain the best of success, which is extremely difficult to obtain. O tiger among kings! You will
also be surrounded by the prosperity of austerities. With Gandhari, you will reach the end obtained by those great-
souled ones. Residing with the slayer of Bala, Pandu always remembers you. O great king! He will always engage
you in what is best for you. The illustrious Gandhari, engaged in serving you, will obtain the worlds with her husband and your daughter-in-law, Kunti, will also go there. She is Yudhishthira's mother and he is eternal dharma. O
king! We can see this with our divine sight. Vidura can be seen in the great-souled Yudhishthira. Having purified
himself  through  meditation,  Sanjaya  will  obtain  heaven."  On  hearing  this,  the  great-souled  Indra  among  the
Kouravas and his wife were delighted and welcomed these words. They praised Narada's learned words. They
worshipped Narada in an unmatched way. O king! All the large number of brahmanas also repeatedly worshipped
Narada a lot. They were delighted and this also cheered King Dhritarashtra up.'
