Vaishampayana said, 'While this was going on, the king of Saindhava told the kings, "Stand firm. Attack. Surround them." When the soldiers saw Bhima, Arjuna and the twins with Yudhishthira, the terrible sound of battle
arose. On seeing those tigers among men, intoxicated with their strength, like tigers, those from Shibi, Sindhu and
Trigarta were despondent. Bhima grasped a mace that was constructed entirely out of iron and was decorated with
gold. He rushed towards Saindhava, who had been driven by destiny. Then Kotikashya placed himself in between.
He surrounded and attacked Vrikodara with a large number of chariots. Though the arms of the warriors hurled
many spears, javelins and iron arrows at him, Bhima did not tremble at all. With his mace, Bhima slew an elephant, the rider and fourteen foot soldiers who were in the vanguard of Saindhava's army. Wishing to seize Souvira, in the vanguard, Partha[Arjuna.] slew five hundred maharathas, who hailed from the mountains. In an instant, in that
battle, the king[Yudhishthira.] himself killed one hundred brave and chief Souvira warriors who had attacked him. Nakula was
seen to descend from his chariot, with a sword in his hand. Like scattered seeds, he severed the heads of those who
were guarding at the rear. Like peacocks falling from a tree, Sahadeva fought warriors on elephants from his chariot and struck them down with his iron arrows. Then Trigarta descended from his great chariot with a bow. He was
skilled with the club and slew the four horses of the king[Yudhishthira.]. On seeing the foot soldier who was near, King Dharmaraja, Kunti's son, pierced him in the chest with an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon. Struck in the
chest, the brave one began to vomit blood and fell down before Partha[Yudhishthira.], like a tree that had been uprooted. Since
his horses had been slain, Dharmaraja, together with Indrasena, descended from his chariot and climbed onto Sahadeva's giant chariot. Picking out Nakula, Kshemankara and Mahamukha attacked him from both sides with
showers of sharp arrows. While they showered arrows on him like monsoon clouds, Madri's son slew them with
one large arrow[Vipatha, a kind of large arrow.] each. Suratha, the king of Trigarta, was skilled in fighting with elephants. He stood on the pole
of his chariot and had Nakula's chariot destroyed by an elephant. But Nakula wasn't frightened and descended
from his chariot. He held a sword and a shield in his hand. He whirled them and stood his ground, as immobile as a
mountain. Suratha desired to kill Nakula and dispatched his supreme elephant, which angrily attacked with its
trunk raised. But Nakula approached the elephant and sliced off the elephant's trunk and tusks, from the roots, with
his sword. The elephant was adorned with anklets. It lowered its head, and with a giant roar, fell down on the
ground, crushing the riders through this fall. Having accomplished this great deed, Madri's brave and maharatha
son ascended Bhimasena's chariot to find some rest. On seeing King Kotikashya rush towards the battle, Bhima
sliced off his charioteer's head, who was goading the horses, with an arrow that had the head of a razor. The king
did not realize that his charioteer had been slain by the mighty-armed one. With the charioteer killed, the horses
ran hither and thither on the field of battle. He[Kotikashya.] was without a charioteer and wished to flee. But Bhima Pandava,
supreme among warriors, killed him with a javelin he hurled with his hand. Using sharp and iron arrows, Dhananjaya cut off the heads and bows of twelve from Souvira. With his arrows, the atiratha[An unrivalled warrior, whose valour is unlimited, greater than a maharatha.] slew in battle Shibis, the
foremost among Ikshvakus, Trigartas and Saindhavas, as soon as they came within range. Many elephants with
flags and many warriors with pennants were seen to have been killed by maharatha Savyasachi. Headless torsos
and torso-less heads were strewn all over the entire earth. Dogs, vultures, herons, crows, ravens, kites, jackals and
birds feasted on the flesh and blood of warriors who had been slain.

'On seeing that the brave ones had been killed, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, was terrified. He freed Krishna
and got ready to run away. His soldiers were in disarray and he lowered Droupadi[From his chariot.]. Then that worst of men ran
towards the forest to save his life. On seeing Droupadi, with Dhoumya at the forefront, Dharmaraja asked Madri's
brave son to pick her up on his chariot[Probably Sahadeva, since Nakula's chariot had been destroyed.]. After Jayadratha had run away, Vrikodara slew the remaining soldiers
with iron arrows. On seeing that Jayadratha was running away, Savyasachi restrained Bhima from killing off
Saindhava's soldiers. Arjuna said, "I do not see Jayadratha on the field of battle. It is because of that evil one that
we confronted this calamity. O fortunate one! Let us search for him. Why are you killing these soldiers? This is a
pointless task. What do you think?" Having been thus addressed by the wise Gudakesha[Arjuna.], Bhimasena looked at
Yudhishthira and eloquently spoke these words. "The foremost warriors of the enemy have been killed. Others
have fled in different directions. O king! Take Droupadi with you and return from here. O Indra among kings! Take
Droupadi to the hermitage with the twins and great-souled Dhoumya and comfort her. I will not allow the stupid
king of Saindhava to escape alive, even if he escapes to the nether regions or has Shakra as a charioteer." Yudhishthira replied, "O mighty-armed one! Though he is evil in his soul, Saindhava does not deserve to be killed. We
must think of Duhshala and the illustrious Gandhari." On hearing these words, Droupadi was agitated. Though
bashful, she angrily spoke to Bhima. The wise one addressed her husbands, Bhima and Arjuna. "If you wish to do
something that brings me pleasure, kill that wretch of a man. Saindhava is wicked, evil in his intelligence and
brings ill fame to his lineage. An enemy who carries away one's wife, though there is no cause for enmity, or steals
the kingdom, should not be allowed to live, even if he craves pardon in battle." Having been thus addressed, the
two tigers among men went to search for Saindhava. The king returned with Krishna, together with the priest.

'When he entered the hermitage, he saw that the seats and the pots were strewn around. Markandeya and the
other brahmanas had been dispersed. The assembled brahmanas had been lamenting over Droupadi and the immensely wise one met them, together with his wife and brothers. On seeing that the king had returned and Droupadi had been brought back again, after the defeat of Sindhu and Souvira, they were delighted. Surrounded by them,
the king seated himself there. The radiant Krishna entered the hermitage with the twins.

'On learning that the enemy had travelled only one krosha, Bhima and Arjuna spurred their horses and swiftly
rushed after him. Manly Arjuna performed an extraordinary act. He killed Saindhava's horses from a distance that
was one krosha away. He possessed divine weapons and he wasn't disturbed in times of difficulty. He performed
this difficult task with arrows that had mantras invoked over them. Then the brave Bhima and Dhananjaya rushed
at the terrified and solitary Saindhava, who had lost his horses and was disturbed in his senses. Saindhava saw that
his horses had been killed and was extremely miserable. Dhananjaya had performed an extremely valorous task.
He[Jayadratha.] made up his mind to run away towards the forest. But seeing that he was running away, mighty-armed Phal-
guna followed him and spoke these words. "With such valour, how did you think of abducting a woman by force?
O prince! Turn around. Flight does not become you. Leaving your followers in the midst of an enemy, how can
you run away?" But though addressed by Partha[Arjuna.], Saindhava did not turn around. The strong Bhima suddenly
rushed at him, exclaiming, "Stay! Stay!" "Don't kill him," responded the compassionate Partha.'
