'Vasudeva said, "O Partha! This is the great and beautiful city of Magadha. It is rich in cattle and is always full of
water. It is prosperous and has no disease and has many splendid mansions. O tata[The word is usually used for a son, but has a more general meaning and can be applied to any student, child,
inferior or junior. It is a term of affection. The word is also used for a father or someone in similar paternal
position.]! There are five large mountains, the extensive Vaihara, Varaha, Vrishabha, Rishigiri and the beautiful Chaitya[Rajagriha's five hills are today known as Vipulagiri, Ratnagiri, Udayagiri, Shonagiri and Vaibhara (or
Vyahara).]. These five giant mountain
peaks are covered with trees with cool shade and though separate, seem to collectively protect Girivraja. They
seem to be concealed in a forest of fragrant and beautiful lodhra trees[Tree with red or white flowers.], beloved by lovers, and with the tips of
their branches covered with blossoms. It was here that the great-souled sage Goutama, rigid in his vows, begot on
Ushinara's shudra daughter, sons like Kakshivana. Because he lived here in this place and because the kings here
showed him homage, Goutama loved the Magadha lineage. O Arjuna! It was here that, once upon a time, Anga,
Vanga and other greatly powerful kings came to Goutama's abode and found happiness. O Partha! Behold the
beautiful array of priyalas[Tree, also known as piyala.] and the charming lodhras, growing near Goutama's abode. Arbuda and Shakravapi,
serpents who scorched their enemies, lived here. This was the abode of Svastika and the supreme serpent Mani.
Because of Mani, Magadha is never avoided by clouds[That is, there is never scarcity of rain. Mani is also known as Maniman.]. Koushika and Goutama have indeed extended their
favours here. Jarasandha imagines that the success of his objectives will continue. But we are about to attack him
and today, his pride will be struck down."'

Vaishampayana said, 'After these words, all the brothers, Varshneya and the two Pandavas, with immense
vigour, started for the city of Magadha and neared the impregnable Girivraja. The city was full of cheerful and
healthy citizens, with large numbers of the four varnas and enlivened with festivities. They avoided the giant
mountain that was the gate of the city, a place where Brihadratha's descendants and the citizens used to worship.
That is the place where Brihadratha killed the bean-eating Rishabha[There is clearly a problem with the text here, since the word used is masha, which means bean. Should it be
mamsa (meat), as it reads in some regional versions? Then, Brihadratha may have killed a meat-eating demon
named Rishabha. Nor is it clear that Rishabha is a proper name. The word also means a bull. In that case, why did
Brihadratha kill a bean-eating bull and why is it important enough to be mentioned?]. Having killed the bean-eater, he had three
kettledrums made and stretching the hide over them, had these placed in his city[The drums were made out of Rishabha's skin. So perhaps it was a bull.]. There, divine blossoms showered when the kettledrums were sounded. They rushed to the end where Chaitya[One of the five peaks.] was, beloved by inhabitants of
Magadha. In their desire to kill Jarasandha, it was like placing their feet on his head[As a metaphor, by scaling Chaitya.]. The peak was fixed, immensely large and ancient. It was always worshipped with flowers and garlands and was firmly established. With
their large and mighty arms, the heroes broke it down[Presumably, they broke down a fortification on the mountain, rather than the mountain itself. The word
shringa, which is used, means the peak of a turret, as well as that of a mountain.]. They then saw the city of Magadha and entered it.

'At that time, the priests were showing homage to King Jarasandha. While he was seated on an elephant, they
carried the sacred fire around him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The three of them entered, ready to do
battle with Jarasandha, dressed as devoted snatakas, and with no weapons other than their bare arms. They saw the
supremely prosperous shops, stocked with food and garlands, swollen with objects of every quality and with every
object that satisfies desire. Having witnessed the prosperity along the streets, those supreme of men, Krishna, Bhi-
ma and Dhananjaya, proceeded along the royal road and those immensely powerful ones forcibly grabbed garlands
from a garland-maker. Then, attired in many-coloured garments, adorned with garlands and beautiful earrings, they
entered the palace of the wise Jarasandha, like lions from the Himalayas looking at a pen full of cattle. O great
king! The arms of those mighty-armed warriors were smeared with sandal and aloe paste. They shone in radiance,
like pillars made of rock. On seeing them, as large as elephants, with shoulders and chests as tall and broad as shala trees, the inhabitants of Magadha were astounded. Those bulls among men, immensely strong, passed through
three rooms that were full of people and proudly arrived before the king.

'Jarasandha arose and greeted them and showed them homage with water to wash the feet, gifts due to a guest
and a mixture with honey[Known as madhuparka and customarily offered to a guest.], as is prescribed. Having shown these courtesies, the lordly king welcomed them. O
king! This was because this was the vow, famous on earth, which he followed. Whenever he learned that snataka
brahmanas had arrived, even if it was the middle of the night, the king who was a conqueror arose to greet them.
On seeing their strange attire, Jarasandha, supreme among kings, approached them and was astonished. O supreme
among the Bharata lineage! As soon as those bulls among men and slayers of enemies saw Jarasandha, they spoke
thus. "O king! May there be health and welfare for you in everything." O tiger among kings! Having said this, they
stood there, looking at the king and at each other. O Indra among kings! Jarasandha then told the Pandavas and the
Yadava, who were disguised as brahmanas, "Please be seated." Blazing in radiance like fires at a sacrifice, those
three bulls among men then took their seats.

'O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Then King Jarasandha, always devoted to the truth, spoke to them in a tone
of disapproval, because of the way they were dressed, "This much is known to me. Nowhere on earth, nowhere in
the world of men, do brahmanas who observe the snataka vow ever outwardly adorn themselves with garlands or
fragrant paste. Who are you, thus adorned in flowers, though your arms bear the marks of wielding bowstrings?
You seem to be brahmanas, but you bear the proud signs of kshatriyas. You are dressed in colourful attire and you
outwardly sport garlands and fragrant paste. Tell me who you truly are, truth is the ornament of kings. Why did
you break down the Chaitya mountain and enter my abode by means other than through the proper gate? Are you
so fearless as to insult the king? This act does not mesh with your purported character. So tell me what your intention is. The brahmana's valour is particularly in his speech. You have arrived before me in this inappropriate way
and you decline to accept the homage I offer you in courtesy. Why have you come to me?" At these words, the
great-souled Krishna, skilled in the use of words, replied in words that were both serene and grave. "O king! Know
that brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas all possess the right to observe snataka vows. There are rules that are general and those that are specific. A kshatriya who observes specific rules always obtains great prosperity. Good fortune is certain for those who adorn themselves with flowers and we have therefore worn them. A kshatriya's valour
is in his arms, his valour is not in the power of speech. O son of Brihadratha! It has thus been said that his speech
is never bold. O king! Brahma has placed his own energy in the arms of kshatriyas. If you wish to witness it, there
is no doubt that you will witness it today. The wise always enter the house of a well-wisher through a gate, but use
that which is not a gate for the house of an enemy. That is the reason we have avoided your gate. Know that whenever we enter the house of an enemy to accomplish an objective, we never accept his homage. That is our eternal
vow."'
