'Brihadashva said, "There was a strong king named Nala, the son of Virasena. He had all the good qualities and
was handsome. He was skilled with horses. He stood at the head of all the kings among men, like the king of the
gods. He was supreme to everyone and had energy like that of the sun. This brave king of the nishadhas was
learned in the Vedas and devoted to brahmanas. He was truthful and commanded a great akshouhini. He loved
dice. Beautiful women desired him. He was generous and had control over his senses. He was a protector and
supreme among archers. He was like Manu[There were fourteen Manus, who were lords of the earth in fourteen different eras. Because of descent from
Manu, a human is known as manava.] himself. Like him, there was in Vidarbha, Bhima, whose valour was
terrible[Though not explicitly stated, Bhima was the king of Vidarbha. This Bhima is not to be confused with the
Pandava Bhima.]. He was brave and had all the qualities. He had no offspring and desired to have offspring. For the sake
of offspring, with fixedness of purpose, he made every endeavour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A brahmarshi named Damana came to him. O Indra among kings! Bhima desired offspring and was knowledgeable about
dharma. With his wife, he offered homage to the greatly resplendent one and satisfied him. Gratified, Damana conferred a boon on him and his wife-a gem among daughters and three generous and extremely famous sons,
Damayanti, Dama, Danta and the immensely resplendent Damana. They had all the qualities and all of them were
fearful and terrible in valour[Obviously this means the three sons.]. Damayanti was beautiful, energetic, famous and fortunate. The slender-waisted
one obtained fame in the world because of her good fortune. When she came of age, hundreds of ornamented slave
girls and friends waited on her, like Shachi herself. Among them, Bhima's daughter, adorned in all the ornaments
and flawless in her limbs, shone like a flash of lightning. She was extremely beautiful and her large eyes were like
those of Shri. Such a beautiful one had not been seen or heard of before among gods, yakshas, men, or others. The
beautiful lady disturbed the minds of the gods themselves.

'"Nala, tiger among men, was unsurpassed on earth. He was so handsome that he was like Kandarpa[The god of love.] personified. In wonder, they repeatedly praised Nala in her[Damayanti's.] presence and Damayanti before the king of Nishadha[Nala was the king of Nishadha.].
Having incessantly heard about each other's qualities, they desired each other, though they had not seen each other.
O Kounteya! That desire for the other became very strong. Nala became incapable of holding that desire in his
heart. He retired alone to a grove near the inner quarters[Of his palace.]. There he saw swans[Or geese.] whose wings were golden. As
they were roaming in the grove, he grasped one bird. Then that roamer of the sky spoke to Nala, 'O king! Do not
kill me. I will do that which will bring you pleasure. O king of the nishadhas! I will speak about you in Damayanti's presence, so that she never thinks of any other man but you.' Having been thus addressed, the king freed the
swan and the swans ascended and flew to Vidarbha. Having arrived at the city of Vidarbha[Meaning the capital city of Vidarbha, named Kundina.], the birds descended
from the sky before Damayanti and she saw them. On seeing those extraordinarily beautiful roamers of the sky,
and surrounded by her friends, she happily wished to grasp them. The swans spread in different directions in that
beautiful grove. Each lady then ran after a particular swan. The swan that Damayanti pursued took her to a secluded area and then addressed Damayanti in human language, 'O Damayanti! There is a king of the nishadhas by the
name of Nala. He is like the Ashvins in beauty and there is no man equal to him. O beautiful one! O slender-waisted one! If you become his wife, your birth and your beauty will become successful. We have seen gods, gandharvas, men, serpents and rakshasas. But we have never seen one like him. One like him has not been seen before.
You are a jewel among women. Nala is supreme among men. The union of the special with the special has all the
qualities.' O lord of the earth! Thus did the swan speak to Damayanti and she replied to the swan. 'Speak this way
to Nala.' O lord of the earth! The one who was born from an egg accordingly promised the lady from Vidarbha. He
returned to Nishadha and told Nala everything."'
