'Sanjaya said, "O king! The Kurus and the Pandavas spent the time in different ways and when night had passed,
they emerged again to fight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A great sound arose from those on your side and
theirs. The foremost among rathas prepared to do battle and elephants were readied. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Infantry and horses were armoured. The tumultuous sound of conch shells and drums was everywhere. At
this, King Yudhishthira spoke to Dhrishtadyumna. 'O mighty-armed one! Construct the vyuha known as makara,
which is capable of tormenting the enemy.' O great king! Thus addressed by Partha, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna,
foremost among rathas, accordingly instructed the rathas. Drupada and Pandava Dhananjaya were at the head. Maharatha Sahadeva and Nakula were the eyes. O great king! The immensely strong Bhimasena was the beak. Subhadra's son, Droupadi's sons, rakshasa Ghatotkacha, Satyaki and Dharmaraja were stationed at the neck of the
vyuha. O great king! Virata, the leader of an army, was at the back, surrounded by Dhrishtadyumna and a large
army. The five brothers from Kekaya were on the left flank. Dhrishtaketu, tiger among men, and the valiant
Karakarsha were stationed on the right flank, so as to protect the vyuha. O great king! The illustrious maharatha
Kuntibhoja and Shatanika were stationed at the feet, surrounded by a large army. The great and might archer
Shikhandi, surrounded by the Somakas, and Iravat stationed themselves at the tail of the makara. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Thus did the Pandavas array themselves in the form of a great vyuha. O great king! When the
sun arose, they armoured themselves and stationed themselves for battle. They had elephants, horses, chariots and
infantry. They raised their colourful standards and umbrellas. They armed themselves with sharp and polished
weapons and swiftly advanced against the Kouravas.

'"O king! Your father, Devavrata, saw this vyuha and arranged his soldiers in the form of a giant counter-vyuha
that had the shape of a curlew[The krouncha bird.]. Bharadvaja's son, the great archer, was at its beak. O lord of men! Ashvatthama
and Kripa were the eyes. Kritavarma, foremost among men and foremost among all archers, was at the head, together with the kings of Kamboja and Bahlika. O venerable one! O great king! Shurasena and your son, Duryodhana, were at the neck, surrounded by many kings. O foremost among men! The king of Pragjyotisha was at the
chest, together with the Madras, Souviras and Kekayas, and surrounded by a large army. Together with his own
army, Susharma, the king of Prasthala[Susharma was the king of Trigarta and the capital of Trigarta was Prasthala.], armoured and stationed himself along the left wing. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The Tusharas, Yavanas, Shakas and Chuchupas stationed themselves along the right wing of that
vyuha. O venerable one! Shrutayu, Shatayu and Somadatta's son were stationed at the rear of the vyuha, protecting
each other.

'"The battle between the Pandavas and the Kouravas commenced. O great king! When the sun had arisen, there
was a great encounter. Charioteers confronted charioteers and elephants confronted elephants. Those riding on
horses advanced against those riding on horses. But those on chariots also attacked horse-riders. O king! In that
great battle, chariot-riders not only attacked chariot-riders, but also elephants. Elephant-riders fought against chariot-riders and chariot-riders fought against horse-riders. Chariot-riders fought against infantry and horse-riders
fought against infantry. O king! They were full of wrath and attacked each other in that encounter. Protected by
Bhima, Arjuna, the twins and the other maharathas, the army of the Pandavas was as beautiful as the night sky
with stars. Your army was also resplendent with Bhishma, Kripa, Drona, Shalya, Duryodhana and the others, like
the firmament circled by planets.

'"On seeing Drona, the valiant Kounteya Bhimasena, borne by swift horses, advanced against the men who were
in the army of Bharadvaja's son. Drona was enraged in the battle. O king! In that encounter, the valiant one pierced
Bhima in his inner organs with nine iron arrows. However, though Bhima was forcefully struck in that conflict, he
despatched the charioteer of Bharadvaja's son to Yama's abode. Bharadvaja's powerful son began to control the
mounts himself. He consumed the Pandava soldiers, like a fire amidst a mass of cotton. O supreme among men!
Thus slaughtered by Drona and Bhishma, the Srinjayas and the Kekayas were defeated and began to run away.
Your soldiers were also mangled by Bhima and Arjuna. They lost their senses there, like a proud and beautiful
woman[The imagery seems to be that of a beautiful woman whose pride has been hurt.]. Both the vyuhas were penetrated and there was a destruction of the best of brave ones. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! There was terrible distress in your army and in theirs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
We witnessed the extraordinary sight of all your soldiers and those of the enemy fighting with a single objective in
mind. O lord of the earth! The maharatha Pandavas and Kouravas fought with each other. They repulsed each other's weapons."'
