Vaishampayana said, 'The victorious Nakula went to Hastinapura and the Pandava[Nakula.] invited Bhishma and Dhritarashtra. Having heard of Dharmaraja's sacrifice and learned about sacrifices, they happily set out, with the brahmanas at the forefront. O bull among men! Others also came in hundreds, content in their hearts and desiring to see
Pandava Dharmaraja's sabha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the kings arrived from all the directions.
They brought with them many expensive jewels.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All of them were welcomed with honour-Dhritarashtra, Bhishma, the
greatly intelligent Vidura, all the brothers with Duryodhana at the forefront, all the kings with the preceptor[Drona.] at
the forefront, Subala the king of Gandhara, the immensely strong Shakuni, Achala, Vrishaka, the supreme warrior
Karna, Rita, Shalya the king of the Madras, the maharatha Bahlika, Somadatta of the Kuru lineage, Bhuri, Bhurishrava, Shala, Ashvatthama, Kripa, Drona[Drona has already been mentioned once.], Jayadratha the king of Sindhu, Yajnasena[Another name for Drupada.] and his son, Shalva the
lord of the earth, the greatly famous Bhagadatta, king of Pragjyotisha, all the mlecchas who lived along the shores
of the ocean, the kings from the mountains, King Brihadbala, Vasudeva from Pundra, the king of Vanga, the king
of Kalinga, Akarsha, Kuntala, the Vanavasya, the Andhrakas, the Dravidas, the Simhalas, the king of Kashmir, the
immensely energetic Kuntibhoja, the immensely strong Suhma, all the other kings and warriors from Bahlika, Vi-
rata and his sons, the maharatha Machella, kings, the sons of kings, the lords of many countries, the immensely
valorous Shishupala, invincible in battle, and his son, Rama[Balarama.], Aniruddha, Babhru, Sarana, Gada, Pradyumna,
Samba, the valorous Charudeshna, Ulmuka, Nishatha, Pradyumna's valorous son and all the other Vrishnis who
were maharathas. They all went to the Pandava's sacrifice. Many other kings from the middle regions also went to
the great rajasuya sacrifice of Pandu's son.

'O king! On Dharmaraja's instructions, dwelling houses were provided to all of them. They had many rooms
and were adorned with lakes and trees. There, Dharma's son showed them the best of honours. Having been shown
due homage, all the kings went to their assigned dwelling houses-as tall as the peaks of Kailasa, beautiful,
stocked with every kind of object and surrounded by strongly built and white walls on every side. There were nets
of gold and the floors were paved with precious stones. The stairs were gentle to climb and there were expensive
seats and carpets. They were decorated with wreaths and garlands and perfumed with the best of aloe. They were
white like a swan's feathers and could be seen from the distance of a yojana. The doors were wide, permitting easy
entry and were characterized by every quality. They were constructed out of many metals and looked like the
peaks of the Himalayas.

'After resting there for some time, those lords saw Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, surrounded by many sadasyas[Assistant priests.]
and donating innumerable gifts. O king! Crowded by sadasyas, kings and great-souled brahmanas, the place
looked as beautiful as the vault of the sky[Heaven.], crowded with immortals.'
