'Yudhishthira said, "O Shakuni! You have won this gamble from me by using deceit. Let us now grasp the dice and
play a thousand times. I have a hundred laden jars, each filled with a thousand gold coins. O king! That apart, my
treasury has inexhaustible gold and much gold[Gold is mentioned twice and two different words are used, hiranya and jatarupa. Since both words mean
gold, the distinction between them isn't clear. However, since hiranya also means a golden vessel, as distinct from
gold, that might be the distinction. Alternatively, hiranya also means silver, or any other precious metal.]. Those are the riches I now stake to gamble with you."'

Vaishampayana said, 'As soon as he had spoken, Shakuni told the king, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira said, "My royal chariot is covered with tiger skin and is worth a thousand. It is finely built, beautiful, makes a thunderous noise and is adorned with nets of bells. It gladdens the heart and brought us here. This sacred chariot, supreme among all chariots, roars like the clouds and the ocean. It is drawn by eight horses that are
famous throughout the kingdom. They are noble and have the colour of ospreys. No one who walks the earth can
escape their hooves. O king! These are my riches that I now gamble with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard this, Shakuni used deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira said, "O Soubala! I have one thousand elephants that are in must. They have golden girdles and
are hung with golden garlands. They are spotted[The word used is padmini, which can also mean that they have lotus marks on them. However, for elephants, padmini means the elephants are spotted. The word padmini also denotes a female elephant.]. They are well trained, with fine tusks and are capable of bearing kings. They can withstand every kind of noise in battle. They have giant tusks like shafts[The word in the text actually means the shaft of a carriage or a plough, not any shaft.] and each bull has
with it eight she-elephants. All of these elephants have the shade of new clouds[That is, monsoon clouds.] and are capable of battering
down enemy cities. O king! These are my riches that I now gamble with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words, Soubala laughed at Partha. Shakuni told Yudhishthira, "I have
won."

'Yudhishthira said, "I have one hundred thousand slave girls. They are young and extremely beautiful. They
wear bracelets and armlets[The word used is kambukeyura. Keyura is an armlet or upper bracelet. Kambu means a conch shell or a
bracelet. Therefore, 'armlets made of conch shells' is also an acceptable translation. However, armlets and
bracelets seem more correct.], necklaces of gold coins and wear ornaments. They wear expensive garlands and
ornaments, beautiful garments, and are anointed with sandalwood paste. They wear jewels and gold and all of
them are dressed in sheer garments. They are skilled in singing and dancing. On my instructions, they wait upon
and serve the snatakas, advisers and kings. O king! These are my riches that I now gamble with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have
won."

'Yudhishthira said, "I have thousands of male slaves. They are always dressed in fine garments and are skilled
and ready to serve. They are wise, young, skilled and intelligent and wear polished earrings. With plates in their
hands, they feed the guests day and night. O king! These are my riches that I now gamble with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have
won."

'Yudhishthira said, "I have as many[The number isn't specified here, but clearly means one thousand or thousands.] chariots. They have pennants and are equipped with golden vessels.
There are also well-trained horses, charioteers and wonderful warriors. Regardless of whether they fight or do not
fight, each of them receives one thousand as monthly salary. O king! These are my riches that I now gamble with
you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words of Partha, the evil one resorted to deceit. Shakuni told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira said, "I have gandharva horses that are spotted and have the colour of partridges. They have golden harnesses and were happily given by Chitraratha[The king of the gandharvas.] to Gandivadhanva[The one with the Gandiva as a bow. One of Arjuna's names.]. O king! These are my riches that I
now gamble with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard this, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira said, "I have ten thousand chariots, carts and horses. They are yoked to the best draught animals. I
have thousands of soldiers from each varna. They drink milk and feed on rice and grain. There are sixty thousand
of them and all of them have broad chests. O king! These are my riches that I now gamble with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira said, "I have four hundred treasure chests made of copper and iron. Each of them has five receptacles filled with beaten gold. O king! These are my riches that I now gamble with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."'
