'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Duryodhana saw that Bhishma was angry in the battle. O great king! He also saw
that he was surrounded by the Pandavas, like clouds in the sky surrounding the sun after summer is over. He addressed Duhshasana. 'This brave and great archer, Bhishma, is the destroyer of enemies. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! He has been covered on all sides by the brave Pandavas. O brave one! It is your duty to protect the extremely great-souled one. In this battle, protect Bhishma, our grandfather, so that he can kill the Panchalas and the
Pandavas in this encounter. I think that it is our duty to protect Bhishma. Bhishma, the great archer, is our protector
and is also our grandfather. With all your soldiers, surround the grandfather. If you protect him, you will perform a
difficult task in this battle.' In the encounter, having been thus addressed, your son, Duhshasana, stationed himself
around Bhishma, surrounding him with a large army. Subala's son had many hundreds and thousands of horses.
The riders had polished spears and wielded swords and spikes. They were proud and extremely swift. This was a
force with standards. These supreme among men were trained and skilled in battle. They surrounded Nakula, Sahadeva and Pandava Dharmaraja from every direction and repulsed those best of men. King Duryodhana sent ten
thousand brave horse-riders to restrain the Pandavas. They penetrated with great force, like Garudas advancing to
do battle. O king! The earth was struck with the hooves and trembled because of the sound. A great noise from the
hooves of the horses could be heard then. It was like a large forest of bamboos being burnt on a mountain. As they
advanced there, a great cloud of dust arose. It rose up into the path of the sun and shrouded the sun. The army of
the Pandavas was agitated because of the force of these horses, as if a flock of swans had descended onto a large
lake with great force. Nothing could be heard because of the sounds of neighing.

'"O great king! In that battle, King Yudhishthira and the Pandavas who were Madri's sons spiritedly checked the
force of those horse-riders, like the shoreline checks the forceful waves of the great ocean on the night of the full
moon, when the waters are full because of the rains. O king! The rathas used straight-tufted arrows to sever the
heads of the horse-riders from their bodies. O great king! They were slain and brought down by those who wielded
firm bows. It was like elephants killed by mighty elephants and hurled into mountainous caverns. They[The Pandava warriors.] roamed
around in the ten directions and used extremely sharp javelins and straight-tufted arrows to slice off the heads. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! The horse-riders were struck by swords. Their heads fell down, like fruit from
large trees. O king! Horses and their riders were seen to be slain there. They fell down and were falling down, in
hundreds and thousands. Having been thus slaughtered, the horses were overcome by fear and fled. It was like deer
trying to protect their lives at the arrival of a lion. O great king! In that great battle, the Pandavas vanquished the
enemy. Having driven the enemy away in the battle, they blew on their conch shells and sounded their drums.

'"In the midst of the soldiers, Duryodhana was seen to be distressed. O best of the Bharata lineage! He spoke
these words to the king of Madra. 'This eldest son of Pandu has vanquished my maternal uncle. O mighty-armed
one! While you have looked on, the powerful one has driven my soldiers away. O mighty-armed one! Repulse him,
the way the shoreline beats back the abode of makaras. On account of your strength and valour, you are known to
be irresistible.' Having heard the words of your son, the powerful Shalya advanced with a large number of chariots
to the spot where King Yudhishthira was stationed. Shalya suddenly descended with an extremely large force, with
the thrust of the great ocean. Pandava countered him in that battle. In that encounter, maharatha Dharmaraja used
ten arrows to swiftly strike the king of Madra between the breasts. Nakula and Sahadeva struck him with three arrows that were aimed straight. The king of Madra pierced each of them with three arrows. He again pierced Yudhishthira with sixty sharp arrows. Overcome with anger, he struck the two sons of Madri with two arrows. The
mighty-armed Bhima then beheld the king in that battle. He approached the king of Madra, as if advancing into the
jaws of death. The vanquisher of enemies advanced to the spot where Yudhishthira was stationed in the battle. An
extremely terrible and fearful battle raged. The sun was blazing in the other direction then[Noon had passed and the sun was in the western horizon.]."'