'Dhritarashtra said, "I think that destiny is supreme. Since Adhiratha's son strove and could not overcome Pandava
in the battle, shame on manliness. Karna is capable of vanquishing the Parthas, with Govinda, in an encounter. The
world has never seen a warrior who is Karna's equal. I have repeatedly heard Duryodhana speak in this vein. 'Karna is powerful and brave. He wields a firm bow and has conquered exhaustion. O king[This king means Dhritarashtra and should be outside Duryodhana's quote.]! If I have Vasushena as
my aide, even the gods will not be able to withstand me in battle, not to speak of the sons of Pandu, who have lost
their spirits and their endeavour.' On seeing this Karna defeated in the battle, like a snake that has lost its poison
and has run away, what did Duryodhana say? Alas! Durmukha was not skilled in fighting. But he[Duryodhana.] sent him
alone and he entered the fierce battle, like a deluded insect. O Sanjaya! There is no doubt that Ashvatthama, the
king of Madra and Kripa, united with Karna, cannot stand before Bhima. He is extremely terrible and possesses the
strength of ten thousand elephants. They know this and the cruelty and energy of Maruta's[The god of the wind.] son. Why did they
anger the performer of cruel deeds, who is proud of his strength and valour and is like Yama at the end of a yuga,
in the battle? It seems that Karna, the mighty-armed son of the suta, has depended on the strength of his arms alone
and disregarding this[Bhima's strength.], has chosen to fight with Bhimasena in the battle. Pandu's son defeated Karna in the encounter, like Purandara against the asuras. Who is capable of vanquishing him in a fight? In his search for Dhananjaya, he shattered Drona and penetrated my army. Who is capable of approaching Bhima and remaining alive? O
Sanjaya! He is like the great Indra, with the thunderous vajra raised against the danavas. Who has the enterprise to
station himself in front of Bhima? Having reached the capital of the king of the dead, a man may return. But having approached Bhimasena, no one can ever return. Those with limited intelligence will enter and advance against
the wrathful Bhimasena, like insects advancing towards a flame, bereft of their senses. In the assembly hall and in
the hearing of the Kurus, Bhima took a pledge about killing my sons. Having seen Karna defeated, Duhshasana
and his brothers must be thinking about that and, out of fear, must have retreated from attacking Bhima. O Sanjaya! That evil-minded son[Duryodhana.] of mine repeatedly said in the assembly, 'In the battle, Karna, Duhshasana and I
will conquer the Pandavas.' O Sanjaya! On seeing Karna deprived of his chariot and defeated by Bhima, there is
no doubt that he must be severely repenting his refusal of Krishna[A reference to Krishna's mission of peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. On seeing his armoured brothers killed in
the battle by Bhimasena, there is no doubt that my son is greatly tormented by his own crimes. No one who wishes
to live will advance against Pandava Bhima. His weapons are terrible and he is enraged. He is stationed like Death
himself. A man can escape from the mouth and midst of the vadava fire[The subterranean fire, so named because it is in the form of a mare (vadava).]. But it is my view that no one can escape, having approached Bhima's mouth. When they are enraged in battle, the Pandavas, the Panchalas, Keshava
and Satyaki, do not know how to protect their own lives."

'Sanjaya replied, "O Kourava! You are sorrowing because of the destruction of men that is occurring. But there
is no doubt that you are the root behind this destruction of the earth. Devoted to the words of your sons, you are
yourself the cause of this great enmity. Though you were urged, like a dying man, you did not accept the diet and
the medicines. O great king! You have yourself drunk kalakuta, which is impossible to digest[Kalakuta is terrible poison.]. O supreme
among men! You are now suffering the fruits of that action. The warriors on your side are fighting to the utmost of
their strength, but you are censuring them. Let me describe to you the raging battle.

'"O venerable one! On seeing that Karna had been defeated by Bhimasena, five brothers who are your sons,
Durmarshana, Duhsaha, Durmada, Durdhara and Jaya, could not tolerate this. Clad in colourful armour, they advanced against Pandava. They surrounded the mighty-armed Vrikodara from all directions and covered him with
arrows that were like flying locusts. On seeing those princes, who were like the gods in their beauty, suddenly advance against him in that battle, Bhimasena smiled and received them. On seeing your sons approach Bhimasena,
Radheya attacked the immensely strong Bhimasena. O king! He showered arrows that were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. However, Bhima attacked quickly and repulsed your sons. The Kurus surrounded Karna from all
directions and countered Bhimasena with arrows with straight tufts. O king! But Bhima used his terrible bow to
shoot twenty-five arrows and dispatched those bulls among men[Duryodhana's brothers.], with their charioteers, to Yama's eternal
abode. With their charioteers, they lost their lives and fell down from their chariots. They were like giant trees with
colourful blossoms, uprooted by a storm. We witnessed Bhimasena's extraordinary valour. He countered Adhi-
ratha's son and killed your sons with his arrows. O great king! In every direction, the son of the suta was checked
by Bhima's sharp arrows and he could only look at Bhimasena. Bhimasena was angry and his eyes were red with
rage. He repeatedly stretched his giant bow and glanced at Karna."'
