Uma said, "There are those who are controlled in their vows and restrained and reside in beautiful regions, mountainous springs, streams, groves and forests in hills and colourful spots with fruits and roots.
O Shankara! I wish to hear about their sacred rites. O lord of the gods! They reside in vanaprastha and depend only
on their own selves for maintenance."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "Listen attentively to the dharma practised by those who are in vanaprastha. O goddess!
Listen attentively to this and turn your intelligence towards supreme dharma. For those virtuous and controlled
ones who decide to reside in the forest, there are things that ensure success. Listen to the tasks that must be observed by those who are in vanaprastha. They must perform ablutions thrice a day and must perform the rites for
worshipping the ancestors and the gods. They must observe agnihotra and follow the ordinances in offering obla-
tions at sacrifices. They must pick up wild rice and subsist on fruits and roots. They must extract the oil required
from castor and inguda nuts. Having obtained success through the practice of yoga, they must give up desire and
anger. They must resort to virashayya and reside in virasthanas[Respectively, posture meant for heroes and places meant for heroes. The former can be interpreted as virasana,
while the latter is a desolate spot that only the brave can step foot in.]. A virtuous person must be immersed in yoga
and during the summer, he must expose himself to the five fires[Four fires on four sides and the sun overhead.]. He must follow the yoga practised by a frog and
other similar techniques[A frog is a manduka and this probably means mandukasana.]. He must always be in virasana. He must sleep on the bare ground. A person whose
mind has turned towards dharma must act so as to expose himself to the cold and to the heat. He must subsist on
water or air. He must eat moss. He must be controlled and must be an Ashmakutta or a Samprakshala. He must be
attired in rags and hides. He will wear garments made out of deerskin. Following dharma and following the ordinances, he must spend as much of time as left to him. He must always reside in forests. He will roam around in
forests. He will always be found in a forest. He will approach his preceptor in the forest. He will reside there and
obtain his subsistence from the forest. His dharma is represented by the rites of offering oblations. He will perform
the  five  sacrifices.  He  will  follow  the  injunctions  mentioned  in  the  Vedas  and  perform  sacrifices  on
nagapanchami[Ceremony in which serpents (naga) are worshipped. Observed on the fifth lunar day (panchami) in shuklapaksha
in the month of Shravana (July-August).]. He will be devoted to performing sacrifices on the eighth lunar day and chaturmasya. He will
always perform sacrifices on the day of the full moon and all the other sacrifices. He will be freed from all attachment towards the wife. He will be free from all kinds of confusion. He will be freed from all kinds of sin. Such a
sage will roam around in the forest. His supreme possessions are the sacrificial ladle and vessel and he is always
devoted to the three fires. Such a righteous person is established on the virtuous path and goes to the supreme destination. Such sages resort to the dharma of rishis and obtain success. They go to Brahma's extremely auspicious
world and to Soma's eternal world. O goddess! I have thus told you briefly about the auspicious dharma followed
by those who resort to vanaprastha. However, there are many detailed aspects."

'"'Uma said, "O illustrious one! O god! O lord of the gods! O one to whom all creatures bow down! There is a
dharma that is spoken about as leading to success and large numbers of sages follow it. Tell me about this. Success
has been spoken about and those who reside in the forest have obtained success through that mode. However, there
are also others that follow their own independent modes and remain attached to their wives. What is said to be
their dharma?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! All those ascetics who follow independent modes sport with their wives.
Their shaved heads and ochre robes are because of where they reside during the night[The suggestion seems to be that these are facades.]. The rishis perform ablutions thrice a day and render great oblations. Meditation, resorting to the virtuous path and following the instructions  have  been  specified  for  them.  I  have  earlier  spoken  about  the  dharma  that  should  be  followed  by  forest
dwellers. If that dharma is followed, one obtains the fruits of austerities. If one is following the dharma of having a
wife, then one should control one's senses and be satisfied with one's own wife alone. Following the ordinances,
one should have intercourse with her when she is in season. The dharma that has been laid down by the rishis is the
dharma that should be followed. Those who know about dharma do not allow themselves to be overwhelmed by
desire. A person must properly grant the dakshina of freedom from fear to all creatures. If he also frees himself
from violence and anger, he is united with dharma. If a person is compassionate towards all creatures, upright in
his vows towards all creatures and if he looks upon all creatures as his own self, he is united with dharma. Bathing
oneself in all the Vedas and uprightness towards all creatures are equal in merit. Perhaps uprightness is superior.
Uprightness is said to be dharma. Deceit is said to be adharma. A man who is upright is said to be united with
dharma. A person who is upright in this world always resides near the immortals. Therefore, a person who desires
to follow dharma must always be upright. A person who is forgiving and self-restrained, if he has conquered anger
and he does not cause injury, is immersed in dharma. A man who is always devoted to dharma is said to be united
with dharma. A person must not be distracted and must have dharma in his soul. To the best of his capacity, he
must resort to the path of the virtuous. His intelligence and character are then supreme and he is thought to be immersed in the brahman."

'"'Uma asked, "O god! There are ascetics who are stores of austerities. They are radiant in their states. What
kind of conduct ensures this for them? O illustrious one! There are also kings and princes, poor or extremely rich.
Through what deeds can they obtain great fruits? O god! There are also forest dwellers who obtain eternal regions
where they are smeared with divine sandalwood paste. What are their deeds? O god! I have a doubt about the auspicious pursuit of austerities. O three-eyed one! O destroyer of Tripura! Tell me everything about this."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "There are self-controlled people who follow the vow of fasting. They are non-violent
and truthful in speech. They are successful and without disease. After death, they find delight with the gandharvas.
In the right place and following the ordinances, they lie down in manduka yoga. They have dharma in their souls
and initiate themselves. They find delight with the nagas. There are those who reside with deer and survive on the
basis of grass that falls off from the mouth of deer. They initiate themselves in this. They go to Amaravati[Indra's city.] and
find delight there. There are those who follow the vow of surviving on moss and dried leaves. They always follow
the yoga of exposing themselves to the cold. They go to the supreme destination. There are those who survive on
wind and air and eat fruits and roots. They obtain the prosperity of the yakshas and find delight with large numbers
of apsaras. There are those who follow the rites instructed in the ordinances. They follow the yoga of exposing
themselves to the fire and the heat. If they do this for twelve years, they become kings. If a sage controls his food
and carefully observes the rituals for twelve years, near a desert, he becomes a king[The text translates as near a desert. This is interpreted as avoiding food and drink.]. If a person initiates himself
into the vow of lying down on the bare ground, with the open sky in every direction, and follows this for twelve
years, he obtains happiness. O beautiful one! A person who lies down on the ground obtains many kinds of fruits,
extremely expensive beds and houses and the radiance of the moon. If a person obtains subsistence through his
own self and is controlled and restrained in food, giving up his life through fasting, he obtains heaven. If a person
initiates himself in the vow of obtaining subsistence through his own self, follows this for twelve years and gives
up his body in the great ocean, he obtains Varuna's world. If a person initiates himself in the vow of obtaining subsistence through his own self, follows this for twelve years and pierces his feet with stones, he obtains delight with
the guhyakas. There may be a person who cleanses his soul with his own atman. He is beyond the opposite pairs of
sentiments and is without possessions. Immersed in his mind alone, he initiates himself into this vow, which he observes for twelve years. He obtains the world of heaven and finds delight with the gods. If a person initiates himself into the vow of obtaining subsistence through his own self, follows this for twelve years and then gives up his
body as an oblation into the fire, he obtains greatness in Agni's world. O goddess! There may be a brahmana who
is controlled and has initiated himself into the proper ordinances. He immerses himself in his atman. He is beyond
the opposite pairs of sentiments and is without possessions. Immersed in his mind alone, he initiates himself into
this vow, which he follows for twelve years. He then ties a pile of kindling to his shoulder, but is otherwise unattired. He always devotes himself to the path meant for brave ones and is in virasana. He is always in virasthana and
gives up his life in the way followed by brave people. He goes to Shakra's eternal world, where he is honoured
with all the objects of desire. It is full of divine flowers and he is smeared with celestial sandalwood paste. With
dharma in his soul, he resides happily in heaven, with large numbers of gods. If a brave person is always engaged
in the yoga followed by brave people, if he is spirited and gives everything up and if he initiates himself into the
path followed by brave people and is always controlled and pure, then he obtains the eternal worlds that are meant
for brave people. With great ease, he roams around on celestial vehicles that can go wherever they want. He is
handsome and without disease. He goes to Shakra's world and finds happiness there."'"'
