'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! On seeing Drona's son in the vicinity of the gate, what did Bhoja and Kripa do?
Tell me that."

'Sanjaya replied, "Summoning Kritavarma and maharatha Kripa, Drona's son approached the gate of the camp,
overcome with rage. He saw a gigantic being there, as resplendent as the sun and the moon. He saw him stationed
there, guarding the gate, and the sight made the body hair stand up. He was clad in attire made out of tiger skin and
copious quantities of blood flowed from it. The upper garment was made out of black antelope skin and a serpent
was the sacred thread. The arms were thick and large and wielded many kinds of weapons. A giant snake was like
an armlet. His face was like a blazing garland. His gaping and fearsome mouth possessed terrible fangs. He possessed thousands of eyes and was wonderfully ornamented. It is impossible to describe his form or his attire. In
every way, the mountains would be shattered if they looked at him. Large flames issued everywhere, from his
mouth, his nose, his ears and his thousands of eyes. From those energetic flames, hundreds and thousands of
Hrishikeshas[Krishnas.] emerged, holding conch shells, chakras and clubs. For all the worlds, that extraordinary being was
terrifying. On seeing him, Drona's son was not distressed, but showered him with divine weapons. But the gigantic
being devoured all the arrows that were shot by Drona's son, like the mare-headed fire[Vadava is a mare and the subterranean fire, in the waters, is
vadavamukha, shaped like a mare's head.] devouring the agitated
waters. On seeing that his torrents of arrows had been rendered unsuccessful, Ashvatthama hurled a blazing javelin
that was like the flames of a fire. The javelin blazed at the tip. But striking him, it was shattered. It was like a giant
meteor, striking against the sun at the time of the destruction of a yuga and falling down from the firmament. Ashvatthama swiftly unsheathed a shining sword. It possessed a golden handle and was as radiant as the sky. It was
like a flaming serpent emerging from a hole. The intelligent one then hurled that supreme sword at the being. On
striking against the being, it disappeared like a puff of air. Drona's son became angry. He hurled a flaming club that
was like Indra's standard. However, the being devoured this too. When all the weapons were destroyed in this way,
Ashvatthama looked around and saw that the sky was covered with many Janardanas. Devoid of all weapons,
Drona's son beheld this extraordinary sight. He remembered Kripa's words and repenting, said, 'He who does not
listen to the pleasant and beneficial words of well-wishers, has to sorrow later, when he is overtaken by a calamity.
I did not listen to their words. A person who is driven by violence and seeks to kill, violating the injunctions of the
sacred texts, is dislodged from the path of dharma and treads along crooked paths. One should not release weapons
at cattle, brahmanas, the wives of kings, friends, a mother, a preceptor, an aged one, a child, one suffering from
disease, one who is blind, one who is sleeping, one who is frightened, one who has just awoken, one who is intoxicated, one who is a lunatic and one who is distracted. In earlier times, the preceptors have always instructed men in
this way. But I have transgressed the eternal path indicated in the sacred texts. I have begun to tread along a path
that should not be followed and have faced this terrible calamity. The learned ones have said that there is no
calamity greater than retreating from a great task out of fear, once one has embarked upon it. Using my strength
and prowess, I am unable to accomplish the task I wished to. It is said that human tasks are not superior to destiny.
A man may perform a task. However, if destiny does not render it successful, it is said that he is dislodged from
the path of dharma and confronts a calamity. When one begins a task, but withdraws from it because of fear,
learned ones say that this is known as defeat. Because my attempt was evil, this great fear has come upon me. Otherwise, Drona's son would never have retreated from an encounter. This extremely great being has arisen like the
staff of destiny. Even though I think about it in every way, I do not understand who he is. It is certain that my
wicked intelligence has made me embark on a course of adharma. As a consequence, he is seen to counter me in
this way. Therefore, it has been ordained by destiny that I should retreat from this encounter. There is nothing that
can be undertaken unless destiny is favourable. Hence, I will now seek refuge with the lord Mahadeva. I will seek
refuge with Kapardin[Shiva's name.], the lord of the gods and Uma's consort. He will save me from this terrible staff of destiny
that is destroying me. He is adorned in a garland of skulls. He is Rudra Hara, who plucked out Bhaga's eyes[Rudra and Hara are Shiva's names. At the time of Daksha's sacrifice,
Shiva plucked out Bhaga's eyes. Girisha is also Shiva's name.].
That god surpasses all the gods in austerities and in valour. I will therefore seek refuge with Girisha, the wielder of
the trident.'"'
