Vaishampayana said, 'The sacrifice started. Eloquent ones who knew about debating argued and spoke about
many kinds of logic, seeking to defeat each other[The sacrifice was an occasion for debating and arguing.]. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The kings saw  the
supreme arrangements that had been duly made for the sacrifice by Bhima, as if they had been made by the king of
the gods himself. They saw the golden gates and the seats and beds made for relaxing, decorated with large numbers of jewels. There were pots, vessels, jars, jugs and pans. The kings did not see anything there that was not
made out of  gold. Sacred texts were recited and sacrificial altars set up. These  were  made  of  wood,  but  were
adorned with gold. At the right time and following the rites, these radiant altars were consecrated. O lord! The
kings saw that all the animals, from the land and from the water, had been brought. There were cattle, buffaloes,
aged women, aquatic creatures, predatory beasts and birds. There were those born from wombs, eggs, sweat and
plants and herbs. They also saw creatures from the mountainous regions. All the kings saw that the sacrificial arena
was full of animals, cattle and grain and were filled with supreme wonder. Large numbers of excellent sweets were
prepared for the brahmanas and the vaishyas. More than one hundred thousand brahmanas were fed. Kettledrums
were repeatedly struck and made a noise like the roar of clouds. Every day, this sound signified the welcome accorded. In this way, the intelligent Dharmaraja's sacrifice was performed. O king! Piles of food, as large as mountains, were offered. There were tanks of curds and lakes of clarified butter. There are many countries in Jambudvipa. O king! Residents from all of these were seen to come to the king's great sacrifice. There were men from
thousands of races. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They received the copious gifts of wealth that were made.
The king's servants wore garlands and were adorned in jewels and earrings. They served the hundreds and thousands of foremost of brahmanas. These men followed them around with many kinds of food and drink. They offered food and drink that was fit for kings to the brahmanas.'
