Vaishampayana said, 'All of those infinitely energetic warriors were excellent archers. They had tautened bows
and quivers full of arrows. They had armour for their arms and their fingers. They had swords. They grasped them
and took the best of the brahmanas with them. O king! Together with Panchali, they proceeded towards Gandhamadana. They saw lakes, rivers, mountains and forests on the top of the mountain and trees that provided a lot of
shade. There were regions that always had flowers and fruit, frequented by masses of devarshis. The brave ones
controlled their souls and lived on roots and fruit. They travelled through high lands and low, regions that were uneven and full of dangers. They saw many different kinds of animals. The brave and great-souled ones then entered
Mount Gandhamadana, frequented by rishis, siddhas and immortals, loved by gandharvas and apsaras and a mountain peopled by kinnaras.

'O lord of the earth! As the brave ones entered Mount Gandhamadana, a violent storm arose, with a large quantity of rain. A gigantic cloud of dust arose, raising a mass of dry leaves. This suddenly covered the earth, the sky
and heaven. Nothing could be seen when the sky was covered with dust. They were not even capable of communicating to one another what they thought in their minds. Their eyes were enveloped in the darkness and they could
not see. They could not even see each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were battered by the storm
of rocks and dust. The trees were torn asunder by the wind and were forcibly flung down on the ground. A great
sound arose from other trees. "Is the sky falling down on the ground? Are the mountains splitting asunder?" Deluded by the wind, this is what all of them thought in their minds. They were battered by the wind and were frightened. They felt their way with their hands, groping for trees, anthills and uneven terrain along the road and lay
down. Grasping his bow and grasping Krishna, the immensely strong Bhimasena sought shelter under a tree. Dharmaraja and Dhoumya lay down in that great forest. Sahadeva, who had the agnihotra with him, lay down under a
mountain[Sahadeva was in charge of carrying the sacred fire.]. Nakula, the other brahmanas and the greatly asectic Lomasha were alarmed, and seeking refuge in
the trees, lay down.

'Then the wind died down. The storm of dust was calmed. A great downpour started from the heavy clouds.
Aided by the swift wind, there was torrential rain and hail, incessantly. This flooded the ground on all sides. O lord
of the earth! On every side, rivers that were headed towards the ocean were covered with foam and dirt and overflowed. Bearing large quantities of water and overflowing with foam, they rushed with a thunderous roar, uprooting gigantic trees. When the rain subsided, the wind died down, the water flowed down to the lower regions and
the sun appeared, all of them slowly emerged and assembled. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Once again, the
brave ones proceeded towards Mount Gandhamadana.'
