Sanjaya said, "On seeing the great-spirited Keshava and Arjuna arrive together, he thought that Adhiratha's son
had been killed in the battle by the wielder of Gandiva. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Kounteya, the destroyer
of enemies, greeted them in extremely affectionate words and, honouring them, smiled.

' "Yudhishthira said, 'O Devaki's son! Welcome. O Dhananjaya! Welcome. I am extremely delighted to see
Achyuta and Arjuna together. Since neither of you is injured, how was your battle with the maharatha[Karna.]? He is
like virulent poison in a battle and is skilled in the use of all weapons. He is the leader of all the sons of Dhritarashtra and is their armour and their mail. He was protected by the archers Vrishasena and Sushena. The invincible and
immensely valorous one had learnt weapons from Rama[Parashurama.] himself. He was the protector of the sons of Dhritarashtra and advanced at the forefront of their army. He was the one who killed enemy soldiers. He is the one who
crushed large numbers of the enemy. He was engaged in Duryodhana's welfare and was always ready to rise up
against us. In a great battle, he could not be assailed even by the gods, together with Vasava. In his energy and his
strength, he was like the wind and the fire. He was as deep as the nether regions and brought joy to his well-wishers. By killing Karna in the great battle, you have brought an end to my enemies. It is through good fortune that
you have come to me, like two immortals after killing an asura. O Achyuta! O Arjuna! I fearlessly fought a battle
with him today. He was like an enraged Yama, wishing to slay all beings. He brought down my standard and slew
my parshni charioteers. While Yuyudhana looked on, I was rendered without a chariot and without horses. Dhrishtadyumna, the brave twins, Shikhandi, Droupadi's sons and all the Panchalas looked on. O mighty-armed one[Though both Krishna and Arjuna are present, Yudhishthira is specifically speaking to Arjuna.]!
Having defeated large numbers of the enemy, the immensely valorous Karna vanquished me in the great battle,
though I strove to my utmost. He pursued me in the battle and spoke many harsh words. There is no doubt that he
defeated the best among the warriors. O Dhananjaya! It is because of Bhimasena's powers that I am still alive.
There is no need to speak a lot. That humiliation was overwhelming. O Dhananjaya! I have been frightened about
him for thirteen years. I was not able to sleep at night. Nor could I be happy during the day. O Dhananjaya! Because of my enmity towards him, it was as if I was burning. I was like a rhinoceros or an elephant, knowing that it
was going to die[The image is of old elephants or rhinos, which retire from the group to
die.]. O lord! I continuously thought about the time when he would go to Yama. How would I bring
about Karna's destruction in the battle? O Kounteya! Whether I was awake or sleeping, Karna was always in front
of me. I saw him everywhere. The entire universe was full of Karna. O Dhananjaya! Wherever I went, I was frightened of Karna. And wherever I went, I saw him stationed in front of me. I was forced to run away from that brave
one in the battle. O Partha! I was defeated, with my horses and my chariot and he let me escape with my life. What
is the point of remaining alive? What again is the point of the kingdom? I have been shamed by Karna, the ornament of a battle. What was not obtained by me earlier in the battle with Bhishma, Kripa and Drona, has been obtained by me in the encounter with the maharatha son of a suta. O Kounteya! That is the reason I am asking you
about your welfare now. Tell me everything about how Karna has been slain by you. His valour in a battle is like
that of Shakra. His bravery is like that of Yama. He is like Rama[Parashurama.] in weapons. How was he killed? He is famous
as a maharatha. He is skilled in every method of fighting. Among all the wielders of the bow, he is the only man
who is the foremost. O lord of the earth! He was always honoured by Dhritarashtra and his sons for your sake[That is, as a counter to Arjuna.].
How was Radheya killed by you? O Arjuna! Among all the warriors, Dhritarashtra always used to regard Karna,
bull among men, as the cause of your death in battle. O tiger among men! How was he killed by you in the encounter? O Bibhatsu! Tell me everything about how Karna has been killed by you. O tiger among men! In the sight
of his comrades and well-wishers, did you sever his head, like a tiger against a ruru deer? In the battle, the son of a
suta was searching for you and looked in every region and every direction. In the battle, Karna wished to give a
bull-elephant to anyone who pointed you out. Has he been brought down by your extremely sharp arrows shafted
with the feathers of herons? Having been killed by you in the battle, is the evil-souled son of a suta lying down on
the surface of the earth? Perhaps you have brought me supreme delight today, by killing the son of a suta in the
battle. Intoxicated with his pride, the son of a suta looked everywhere for you. He prided himself on his valour.
Having clashed against you in the battle today, has he been killed by you? For your sake, he was prepared to give
others a golden chariot and the best of elephants yoked to that chariot[Karna promised these to the person who would point Arjuna out.]. He always sought to challenge you in an
encounter. O son[The word used is tata.]! Has that wicked one indeed been killed by you in the battle? He was always crazy with insolence about his bravery and he spoke about it in the assembly of the Kouravas. He was always dear to Suyodhana.
Has that evil one been killed by you today? When he clashed against you, were red arrows released from your
bow, like birds? That wicked one's body has been mangled and he is lying down today. Has the arm of Dhritrarashtra's son been broken? Full of insolence, he always prided himself in the midst of the kings, delighting
Duryodhana. Because of his delusion, he said, "I will slay Phalguna." Has that ratha been killed by you? The one
with limited intelligence said that he would not wash his feet as long as Partha was alive[Karna took this vow in Section 39 (Volume 3).]. He always observed
that vow. O Shakra's son! Has Karna been killed by you today? In the assembly hall, in the midst of the brave Kurus, the evil-minded Karna spoke to Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] and said, "O Krishna! Why don't you abandon the Pandavas?
They have fallen and are extremely feeble. They have been deprived of their spirits." For your sake, Karna took a
pledge that he would not return without having slain Krishna and Partha. Is the one with wicked intelligence lying
down, his body mangled with arrows? The clash between the Srinjayas and the Kouravas and the state I was reduced to then are known to you. Having clashed against you, has he been slain by you today? Have you released
flaming arrows from Gandiva towards that extremely evil-minded one? He possessed earrings on his head, given to
him by the sun god[However, in Section 43 (Volume 3), Karna donated these to Indra.]. Has Savyasachi really severed that head in the battle? O brave one! When he released arrows in my direction, I thought about Karna's death. Have you today accomplished what I thought about, by bringing down Karna? Protected by Karna, Suyodhana was full of insolence and looked down on us. Having clashed
against you today, has Suyodhana's valour been destroyed? In earlier times, in the assembly hall and in the presence of the kings, he called us sterile sesamum seeds earlier[This incident has been described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. Has the evil-minded and intolerant son of a suta
encountered you in the battle and been killed by you? In earlier times, when Yajnaseni was won by Soubala[This is a reference to the gambling match, described in Section 27 (Volume 2). Yajnaseni is Droupadi's name.],
the evil-souled son of a suta laughed at us and, laughing at her, said that she should be brought. Has he been killed
by you today? When the grandfather, the best wielder of weapons on earth, classified him as only half a ratha, the
one with limited intelligence censured him[The grandfather is Bhishma and the reference is to the listing of maharathas and rathas, described in Section 59 (Volume 5).]. Has Adhiratha's evil-souled son been killed by you? The fire of intolerance has always blazed in my heart and has been fanned by the breeze of humiliation. Having clashed against
the wicked one, have you quenched it today? O Phalguna! Tell me and pacify me.'" '
