'"Bharadvaja asked, 'How do qualities of the earth resort to the body and create fire? How does the
wind find a place for itself and flow?'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'O unblemished one! O brahmana! I will recount to you the flow of the air. In the
bodies of all living beings, the powerful wind leads to endeavour. There is fire in the head and this
protects the body. Prana is the fire in the head and this causes exertion. This is the living being. This
is in all living beings. This is the eternal being. This is the mind, intelligence and ego of all living beings. It is also the object of the senses. Everything is sustained in every way by prana. Because of
samana at the rear, each of them[Each of the senses.] follows its own course of action. There is a fire at the root of the
genital organs and the anus. This is apana. It circulates and bears along urine and excrement. In each
of these three[Prana, samana and apana.], there is a single force that makes all the efforts at action. Learned people refer to it as
udana. There is a fire that resides in all the joints of human bodies. This is said to be vyana. The qualities of the fire are circulated by samana. This part of the element circulates in the liquids and the diseases. There is a fire that resides in its own spot between apana and prana. It works with prana and
apana and enables the digestion of food. There is a channel that is from the mouth to the anus and
ends at the anus. All the other channels in living bodies emerge from this main channel. The different
kinds of breaths of life flow and mingle together. The fire that leads to the digestion of food in bodies
is ushma. Prana bears the force of the fire down to the anus and then sends that fire upwards again.
What has been digested resides below the intestine. What has not been digested resides above the
navel. All the life in the body is sustained in the midst of the navel. All of them flow out from the
heart, diagonally, upwards and downwards. Goaded by prana, these ten[Probably meaning the five kinds of breaths of life and the five elements.] convey the juices along the
veins. This is the path[The main channel.] followed by yogis who go towards the supreme objective. They conquer fatigue. They are patient. They drive the atman up to the head. These are the different kinds of prana
and apana in the bodies of living beings. That fire always burns inside, just as if it had been placed on
a plate.'"'
