'Yudhishthira asked, "What must a king do? What acts bring him happiness? O supreme among those who uphold dharma! Tell me everything about this in detail."

'Bhishma replied, "I will certainly tell you this. Listen to what has been determined about tasks. These are
the duties of a king and having performed these, he will be happy. However, we have heard an extremely great
account about a camel and he should not act in that way. O Yudhishthira! Listen to this. In the age of Prajapati,
there was a great camel who could recall his earlier existences. He engaged in great austerities in a forest and
was rigid in his vows. At the end of those austerities, the lord was delighted and the grandfather[Brahma.] delighted
him by graning him a boon.

'"The camel said, 'O illustrious one! Through your favours, let my neck become extremely long. O lord!
Let me be able to graze one hundred yojanas in front of me.'"

'Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed, the great-souled one, the granter of boons, agreed. Having obtained that supreme boon, the camel went to his own forest. Since he had obtained the boon, the evil-minded
one became lazy. Confounded by destiny, the evil-souled one no longer wished to go out to graze. There was
an occasion when he had stretched out his neck one hundred yojanas to graze, without any exhaustion in his
mind. A great storm arrived. The one with the soul of an animal placed his head and neck inside a cave, where
they got stuck. Monsoon arrived and a great flood submerged the world. There was a hungry jackal who was
shivering from the cold. Afflicted by the water, he and his wife quickly entered the cave. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! The flesh-eater was suffering greatly from hunger. On seeing the camel's neck, he began to
eat it. The animal[The camel.] realized that he was being eaten. Extremely miserable, he tried to contract himself. The
animal flung his neck around, upwards and downwards. However, the jackal and his wife continued to eat him.
The jackal killed and ate the camel. When the rains were over, he emerged through the mouth of the cave.
Thus, the evil-minded camel was led to his destruction. Behold the great sin that progressively comes about
because of laziness. You must abandon such conduct. Resort to yoga and control your senses. Manu has said
that the foundation of victory is intelligence. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Tasks performed with intelligence are the best, those performed with arms are middling and those performed with thighs are the worst,
because they are meant to bear loads. O unblemished one! If a person is accomplished and controls his senses,
if he listens to secret counsel and if he has excellent aides, then his kingdom lasts. O Yudhishthira! Those who
examine the objectives are established in this world. With the help of their aides, they are capable of ruling
over the entire earth. Virtuous ones, who know about the ordinances, have spoken about this earlier. You are
like the great Indra in your influence. I have also spoken to you about the foresight of the sacred texts. O king!
Conduct yourself in accordance with that."'
