'"Bharadvaja asked, 'What are said to be the fruits of donations? What about dharma and conduct? What about
austerities, extremely severe austerities, studying and oblations?'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'Sins are pacified through oblations. Studying leads to supreme peace. It is said that one obtains objects of pleasure through donations. Everything is obtained through austerities. It is said that donations are
for two purposes, for the sake of the next world and for this one. Out of whatever is given to the virtuous, something accrues in the next world. Whatever one gives to those who are not virtuous leads to objects of pleasure in
this world. One obtains fruits in accordance with the donations one has given.'

'"Bharadvaja asked, 'In the conduct of dharma, who should follow what? What are the signs of dharma? How
many kinds of dharma are there? You should tell me this.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'Those who are engaged in following their own dharma are learned. They obtain the fruits of
dharma. If one doesn't act in this way, one is deluded.'

'"Bharadvaja said, 'O brahmana rishi! Four kinds of ashramas were ordained in earlier times. You should tell
me about the conduct that is prescribed for each of these.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'In ancient times, the illustrious one[Brahma.] laid down four ashramas for the sake of protecting dharma and for the welfare of the worlds. Of these, residing in the household of the preceptor is said to be the first
ashrama[Brahmacharya.]. He must cleanse himself properly. He must be humble and follow the prescribed rituals. He must be
modest in his soul. He must worship the two twilights[Morning and evening, sandhya.], the sun, the fire and the gods. He must give up excessive
sleep and laziness. He must worship the preceptor. He must study the Vedas and listen to them. He must purify his
soul. He must perform ablutions thrice[Morning, noon and evening.]. He must follow brahmacharya. He must tend to the fire. He must always
serve his preceptor. He must always subsist on begging and single-mindedly give him[The preceptor.] everything that has been
obtained. He must receive all the instructions the preceptor favourably bestows on him[The student must not ask the preceptor for instruction, but wait for the
instruction.]. He must attentively meditate on whatever has been obtained through the preceptor's favours. On this, there is a shloka. "A brahmana who
obtains the Vedas by serving his preceptor obtains the fruits of heaven and is successful in his desires." Indeed,
garhasthya is said to be the second ashrama. I will tell you in detail about all the conduct and signs for this. It is
recommended that those who have returned[After studying in the preceptor's household.] follow the ashrama of the householder. With a view to attaining
fruits, such a person should marry and observe the conduct of dharma with her. All the three objectives of dharma,
artha and kama can be obtained through this mode. One must look towards these and obtain riches through beneficial deeds. The householder should follow garhasthya and obtain riches from the mountains and the oceans. These
will be obtained if he studies well and serves the cause of the brahmana rishis. He must offer oblations and practise
rituals. Through the favours of the gods, riches will then be obtained. This is said to be the foundation of all the
ashramas. There are those who dwell in the residences of their preceptors. There are others who are mendicants.
There are also those who have resolved to follow the vows and rituals of dharma. All these enjoy sustenance
through shares in alms and sacrifices[Offered by householders.]. Those in vanaprastha must renounce and not store objects. These righteous and virtuous people generally look for medication in being devoted to studying, visiting the tirthas for the
purpose of seeing different countries and in roaming around the earth. Without any malice, one must stand up and
greet them with pleasant words and gifts, depending on one's capacity. One must give them the best of seats and
beds. This must be one's conduct and action. On this, there is a shloka. "If a guest returns from a house with his
wishes unsatisfied, he takes away all the good deeds[Of the householder.] and leaves him with his bad deeds." Therefore, sacrifices
must be performed[This goes back to the duties of the householder.]. The gods must be pleased and the ancestors must be satisfied. One must study the Vedas,
listen to them and tend to the rishis. For the sake of Prajapati, one must have offspring. On this, there are two
shlokas. "One must be affectionate towards all beings, with pleasant words that are agreeable to hear. Censure, the
inflicting of hardships and harshness are reprehensible. Disrespect, pride and insolence are condemned. There must
be non-violence, truthfulness, lack of anger and austerities, recommended for all the ashramas." A person in the
householder stage must always observe the qualities of the three objectives. Wearing garlands, ornaments and garlands, the smearing of the body with unguents, taking pleasure from singing, dancing and musical instruments,
pleasant and cheerful objects that bring delight to hearing and sight, the enjoyment of food and drink that is swallowed, licked, drunk and sucked, satisfaction with many kinds of desirable objects and the gratification of sexual
desire with one's own wife are allowed. Such a person enjoys happiness and obtains the objective of the virtuous.
There may be a householder who follows his own dharma, but observes unchhavritti[There are grains left after a crop has been harvested, or after grain has
been milled. If one subsists on these leftovers, that is known as
unchhavritti.]. He gives up all exertion
that is for the pursuit of desire and happiness. The attainment of heaven is not at all difficult for him.'"'
