'Lomasha said, "On approaching the ocean, the illustrious rishi who was Varuna's son told the gods and the rishis
who had gathered with him, 'For the welfare of the world, I will drink up Varuna's abode. Swiftly make the
arrangements that are appropriate.' Having spoken these words, the undecaying son of Mitra and Varuna began to
drink up the ocean in his anger, while all the worlds looked on. On seeing how the ocean was being drunk up, the
immortals, together with Indra, were extremely astounded and began to worship him by chanting his praises. 'You
are the protector. You are the creator of the worlds. You ensure the welfare of the worlds. Through your grace, the
universe, with all the immortals, will be saved from destruction.' While he was worshipped by the thirty gods, the
musical instruments of the gandharvas sounded in every direction. Divine blossoms were showered down on him.
The great-souled one made the great ocean bereft of water.

'"On seeing that the great ocean had been rendered waterless, the gods were extremely delighted. Grasping divine and supreme weapons, and with uplifted hearts, they began to kill those danavas. They were killed by the
great-souled thirty gods, who were extremely strong and swift and roared out aloud. They were unable to withstand the force of the great-souled gods or bear that force. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Attacked by the
thirty gods, the danavas let out terrible roars. Being attacked, they could put up a tumultuous fight only for an instant. They had already been burnt through the austerities of the sages who were pure in their souls. Therefore,
though they tried their best, they could not prevent being destroyed by the thirty. They were adorned with golden
armour, earrings and arm-guards. When they were killed, they looked extremely beautiful, like kimshuka
flowers[Kimshuka is the name of a tree with red blossoms and is also the name of the flower.]. O supreme among men! Those among the Kaleyas who were not killed, cleft the goddess earth and
sought refuge in the nether regions.

'"On seeing the danavas killed, the thirty gratified the bull among sages with diverse praises and words. 'O immensely fortunate one! Through your favours, the worlds have obtained great happiness. The Kaleyas, cruel in valour, have been killed through your energy. O mighty-armed one! You ensure the welfare of the worlds. Fill up the
ocean again, by giving up the water that you had drunk.' Having been thus addressed, the illustrious bull among
sages replied, 'The water has already been digested by me. Think of some other means and make your best efforts
to fill up the ocean.' Having heard the words of the maharshi, whose soul had been perfected, the assembled gods
were surprised and distressed. They took each other's leave and bowed in salutation to the bull among sages. O
great king! All the subjects and brahmanas returned whence they had come. The thirty gods, together with Vishnu,
went to the grandfather. They consulted again and again about filling up the ocean. All of them joined their hands
in salutation and spoke about filling up the ocean."'
