Vaishampayana said, 'The lord of men possessed the eyesight of wisdom. Having heard Sanjaya's words, he began
to consider the pros and cons of the war. The intelligent one considered them in detail, the good and the bad. He
reflected on them, wishing for victory for his sons. The intelligent lord of men reflected on the strengths and the
weaknesses, the powers of the two sides in battle. He concluded that the Pandavas possessed superior strength and
energy, both divine and human and that the Kurus were weaker in strength.

'He addressed Duryodhana. "O Duryodhana! This anxiety does not leave my mind. I know this to be the truth,
and do not deduce it from my imagination. All beings have excessive affection towards their sons and, according
to capacity, do everything to please them and ensure their welfare. In a similar way, it is usually seen that those
who have been benefited wish to bring great pleasure to their benefactors in return. Therefore, remembering the
good deeds performed by Arjuna in Khandava, Agni will help him in the terrible encounter between the Kurus and
the Pandavas. Dharma and many other residents of heaven will be invoked and be on the side of the Pandavas, out
of affection for their sons. Desiring to protect them from the fear of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the others, I think
that their wrath will be ignited, like lightning. The Parthas are tigers among men. They have human valour and are
skilled in the use of weapons. With the gods as their aides, they cannot be repulsed. He possesses the supreme and
celestial bow Gandiva, which is irresistible. He has Varuna's divine and great inexhaustible quivers, always filled
with arrows. He possesses the monkey on his celestial standard, which blazes trails of smoke. His chariot has no
equal in the four corners of earth. It has the roar of a giant cloud and when men hear its giant, fearful and thunderous roar, the enemies are terrified. The worlds know him for his superhuman valour. The kings know him to be one
who can vanquish the gods in battle. He has been seen to grasp five hundred arrows and release them in an instant,
so that they descend a long distance away. Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Drona's son, King Shalya of Madra and men
who are neutral declare that when Partha is stationed in battle, even superhuman kings cannot counter him. He is a
tiger among men and is a destroyer of enemies. In a single burst, he unleashes five hundred swift arrows. The Pan-
dava is Kartavirya's[Kartavirya Arjuna, famous king of the Haihayas. He was killed by Parashurama.] equal in the valour of his arms. This Arjuna is a great archer and is protected by the great
Indra and Upendra[Upendra is Vishnu and Krishna's name and owes its origin to Vishnu becoming Indra's younger brother in the
course of the vamana (dwarf) incarnation.]. I see us being slaughtered by him in the great battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I
think about these things throughout day and night. I remain sleepless and without happiness, thinking about peace
for the Kurus. A great destruction has presented itself before the Kurus. O son! I have always favoured peace with
the Parthas, and not this war. I have always thought that the Pandavas have greater strength than the Kurus."'
