Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing his father's words, Dhritarashtra's intolerant son was extremely angered and
again said, "O supreme among kings! If you think that the Parthas cannot be countered because they are helped by
the gods, throw away your fears. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods obtained their divinity because
they are impervious to love, hatred, malice and avarice and because they ignore all sentiments. Dvaipayana Vyasa
and the immensely ascetic Narada have told us this in earlier times, and so has Rama, Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.]. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! The gods never act like humans, driven by love, hatred, malice and avarice. If Agni,
Vayu, Dharma, Indra and the Ashvins favour the Parthas because of their affection, they would not have faced
hardships[Agni was satisfied by Arjuna in Khandava and the other five gods are fathers of the five Pandavas.]. Therefore, you should not have any worries on this account. The gods always ignore sentiments that
have nothing to do with divine affairs. Their divinity would be called into question if the gods were seen to be motivated by love, hatred and avarice. When the fire wishes to burn the worlds and surrounds them in all the directions, wishing to burn them down, I can invoke mantras and it praises me. The energy that the residents of heaven
possess is supreme. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But the gods cannot match me and they know it. O king!
While the worlds look on, with my mantras, I can establish the shattered mountains and summits of the earth.
When the sensate and insensate, the mobile and immobile, face destruction and there is a terrible and large roar,
with a shower of rocks and a gale, driven by compassion for all beings, I can pacify everything, while the universe
looks on. Chariots and infantry can march over the water I have solidified. I am the one who directs the affairs of
the gods and the asuras. When I go with my akshouhinis to any country, whatever be the reason, there the waters
follow my instructions and my desires. O king! There is no fear from snakes and other beings within my dominion.
When beings are asleep, they do not face terrible violence. O king! Parjanya[Indra, the king of rain.] showers down on those who reside
there, without their asking for it. All the subjects are based on dharma and they are not afflicted by anything. The
Ashvins, Vayu, Agni, the Maruts, the slayer of Vritra and Dharma are unable to protect those whom I hate. If they
had been capable of saving my enemies with their great powers, the Parthas would not have endured unhappiness
for thirteen years. I tell you truthfully. The gods, the gandharvas, the asuras and the rakshasas are not capable of
saving the ones whom I hate. It has never been the case that the good and evil I respectively wish to bestow on
both my friends and enemies have failed to materialize. O scorcher of enemies! Whatever I have mentioned as inevitable, has never failed to happen. That is the reason I am known as one who speaks the truth. The world is a
witness to my greatness and it is famous everywhere. O king! I have said all this to reassure you and not because I
wish to praise myself. O king! I have never indulged in self-praise earlier. One who praises one's own self is inferior. You will hear that I have defeated the Pandavas, together with the Matsyas, Panchalas, Kekayas, Satyaki and
Vasudeva. Rivers are destroyed when they reach the ocean. Like that, they and their followers will be destroyed
when they reach me. I possess supreme intelligence. I possess supreme energy. My valour is supreme. I possess
supreme learning. I possess supreme yoga. All these distinguish me over them. Whatever the grandfather[Bhishma.],
Drona, Kripa, Shalya and Shala know about weapons-all that is vested in me." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken thus, wishing to fight, the scorcher of enemies questioned Sanjaya, to determine the time to
accomplish different tasks.'
