'Dhritarashtra said, "Shantanu's son, the learned Bhishma, the illustrious rishi Drona and you yourself have spoken
the truth and that which is best for me. There is no doubt that since those maharathas, the sons of Kunti, are the
sons of Pandu, they are also my sons according to dharma. Since my sons are entitled to this kingdom, there is no
doubt that Pandu's sons are also entitled to this kingdom. O kshatta[Vidura.]! Go and honourably bring them[The Pandavas.] and their
mother here. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Also bring with them Krishna[Droupadi.] of divine beauty. It is through
good fortune that the sons of Pritha are alive. It is through good fortune that Pritha is alive. It is through good fortune that those maharathas have obtained Drupada's daughter. It is through good fortune that our strength has increased. It is through good fortune that Purochana is dead. O greatly radiant one! It is through good fortune that
my great grief has been dispelled."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thereupon, on Dhritarashtra's command, Vidura
went to Yajnasena[Drupada.] and the Pandavas. O king! Having gone there, that righteous man, learned in all the shastras,
addressed Drupada appropriately and waited on him. He[Drupada.] too received Vidura in the appropriate way and they
courteously asked about each other's welfare. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He[Vidura.] saw there the Pandavas
and Vasudeva[Krishna.]. He embraced them lovingly and asked about their welfare. One after another, they worshipped
Vidura, who was immensely wise. O king! On Dhritarashtra's instructions, he repeatedly and affectionately asked
Pandu's sons about their welfare. O lord of the people! He then gave the Pandavas, Kunti, Droupadi and Drupada's
sons the many jewels and other riches that had been sent by the Kouravas through him.

'In the presence of the Pandavas and Keshava[Krishna.], the supremely wise Vidura then addressed Drupada in modest
words of affection. "O king! Listen to my words with your sons and ministers. Dhritarashtra, his sons, his ministers and his relatives have repeatedly and happily enquired about your welfare. O lord of men! He is delighted with
this alliance with you. The immensely wise Bhishma, the son of Shantanu, and all the other Kouravas have enquired about your welfare in every way. The great archer Drona, the son of Bharadvaja and your beloved friend,
has enquired about your welfare, embracing you. O king of Panchala! Dhritarashtra and all the other Kouravas regard themselves as fortunate at this alliance with you. O Yajnasena! This alliance with you has given them greater
pleasure than acquiring a new kingdom.

'"O lord! Knowing all this, you must allow the Pandavas to depart. The Kurus are extremely eager to see Pandu's sons. These bulls among men have been away from home for a long time. They and Pritha must be eager to
see their city. All the chief women of the Kuru lineage and all the inhabitants of the city and the country are waiting to see the Panchala princess, Krishna. O illustrious one! It is my view that without any more delay, you should
issue instructions for the Pandavas to go there[Hastinapura.] with their wife. O king! When the great-souled Pandavas have got
your permission, I shall send word to Dhritarashtra through swift messengers, and the sons of Kunti can leave,
with Kunti and Krishna."'
