Vaishampayana said, 'Oppressed by grief, Gandhari then saw Duryodhana. She suddenly fell down on the ground,
like a severed plantain tree in a forest. Having regained her senses, she repeatedly lamented again. On seeing
Duryodhana lying down, covered in blood, Gandhari embraced him and lamented piteously. "Alas! Alas, son!"

She was afflicted by grief and lamented, her senses overwhelmed. His extremely broad collar bones were decorated with a golden necklace. Oppressed by grief, she sprinkled him with tears flowing from her eyes. Hrishikesha
was near her and she spoke these words to him. "O lord! This war, which would lead to the destruction of relatives,
presented itself. O Varshneya! At that time, this best of kings joined his hands in salutation and spoke to me. 'O
mother! In this clash that has arisen between relatives, you must pronounce words of victory over me.' O tiger
among men! Knowing everything about the catastrophe that he had brought on himself, I told him, 'Where there is
dharma, victory exists there. O son! O lord! Since you are fighting without any confusion, you are certain to obtain
the worlds that can be conquered through weapons.' O lord! Having spoken this earlier, I am not mourning him. I
am sorrowing over the miserable Dhritarashtra, whose relatives have been killed. O Madhava! Look at my son. He
was intolerant and the best among warriors. He was skilled in the use of weapons and was indomitable in battle.
He is lying down on a bed meant for heroes. Those whose heads were consecrated[That is, kings.] would advance ahead of this
scorcher of enemies. He is lying down in the dust now. Behold the progress of time. It is certain that the brave
Duryodhana has attained an end that is not very easy to obtain. He is lying down forwards[The sense being that he did not retreat.], on a bed loved by heroes. The lords of the earth used to honour and delight him earlier. Earlier, the best of women used to fan him with
the best of whisks. He is now being fanned by the best of birds, with their wings. The strong and mighty-armed
one is lying down here. Truth was his valour. He was brought down by Bhimasena in the encounter, like an elephant by a lion. O Krishna! Look at Duryodhana lying down, his body covered with blood. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage[Since Krishna is being addressed, this is a clear typo.]! He has been slain by Bhimasena, with an upraised club. O Keshava! Earlier, the mighty-armed
one brought eleven akshouhinis into the battle. He has now been conveyed to his destruction. This Duryodhana
was a maharatha and a great archer. He is lying down. He has been brought down by Bhimasena, like a tiger by a
lion. He was foolish and disrespected Vidura and his father. He was stupid and wicked and disrespected the aged.
That is the reason he has fallen prey to death. He was stationed on this earth for thirteen years, without any rivals.
My son was the lord of the earth. He has been slain and is lying down on the ground. O Krishna! I will not see the
earth ruled by Dhritarashtra's son. O Varshneya! It used to be full of elephants, cattle and horses. But this did not
last for a long time. O mighty-armed one! I will now see it ruled by others. O Madhava! There will no longer be
elephants, cattle and horses. How can I remain alive? Behold. There is a greater hardship for me than the slaying of
my son. With the brave ones killed in the battle, these women are around me. O Krishna! Look at Lakshmana's
mother[That is, Duryodhana's wife. Lakshmana was Duryodhana's son.]. She possesses beautiful hips, but her hair is dishevelled. She is lying down in Duryodhana's arms and is
like a golden altar. When the mighty-armed one was alive earlier, it is certain that this spirited child would nestle
herself in his excellent arms and pleasure herself in those arms. How is it that my heart is not shattering into a hundred fragments? I have seen my son, together with his son, slain in the battle. The unblemished one is inhaling the
fragrance on the head of her blood-stained son[Lakshmana.]. The one with the beautiful thighs is caressing Duryodhana with
her hand. How can that spirited one not sorrow over her husband and her son? She is sometimes looking at her son
and sometimes at him[Duryodhana.]. The long-eyed one is beating her head with her hands. O Madhava! She is falling down
on the breast of the brave king of the Kurus. Her complexion is like that of a white lotus. Since the ascetic one had
earlier wiped the faces of her son and her husband, she seems to be between two white lotuses too[Duryodhana and Lakshmana.]. If the sacred
texts and what we have heard is true, then it is certain that the king has obtained the worlds that can be conquered
through the strength of arms."'
