Yudhishthira said, "O gods! I do not see the infinitely energetic Radheya[Karna.]. Nor do I see the great-souled brothers, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja. Those maharathas also offered their bodies as oblations in the battle. In my
cause, there are kings and princes who were slain in the battle. Where are all those maharathas, like tigers in their
valour? Have those supreme men conquered other worlds? O  gods! If  all those maharathas have obtained this
world, know that only in that case will I reside here, with those great-souled ones. If those kings have not obtained
this eternal and auspicious world, then I do not desire to reside here, without my kin and my brothers. On hearing
my mother's words, I performed the final water rites for Karna. She asked me to offer oblations of water to him. O
gods! I am repeatedly tormented by this. I noticed that the infinitely energetic one's feet resembled those of my
mother's. Despite this, I  did not follow Karna, the destroyer of  enemy forces. Had  we  been with Karna, even
Shakra would have been unable to vanquish us in battle. I wish to go to the place where I can see the son of the
sun. Since I did not know who he was, he was slain by Savyasachi. I loved Bhima, terrible in valour, more than my
own life. Arjuna was like Indra and the twins were like the Ashvins. I wish to see Panchali, the one who followed
dharma. I do not wish to remain here. I am telling you this truthfully. O supreme among gods! Without my brothers, what will I do with heaven? The place where they are is like heaven. It is my view that this is not heaven."

'The gods replied, "O son! We follow the instructions of the king of the gods and will do what brings you pleasure. If you really wish to go there, we will instantly take you there."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'O scorcher of enemies! Having said this, the gods instructed the messenger of the
gods. "Show Yudhishthira his well-wishers." O tiger among kings! The messenger of the gods and the king who
was Kunti's son went together to the place where those bulls among men were. The messenger of the gods went on
ahead and the king followed at the back. That was an inauspicious and inaccessible path, frequented by the performers of wicked deeds. It was enveloped by terrible darkness and was covered with hair, moss and lichen. There
was the scent of the performers of wicked deeds and the mire was made out of flesh and blood. It was populated by
gnats, crickets, flies and mosquitoes. There were corpses on every side and the stench of carcasses, here and there.
It was full of bone and hair and infested by worms and insects. From all sides, a blazing fire surrounded it. There
were crows  and vultures, with beaks that were like iron. Their mouths were like needles. There were piles of
ghosts, as large as the Vindhya mountain. There were dead bodies covered with fat and blood, with arms, thighs
and hands severed and stomachs and feet sliced off. The corpses emitted a vile and inauspicious scent and the body
hair stood up. The king, with dharma in his soul, advanced along this and he thought a lot. He saw rivers filled
with boiling water, extremely difficult to traverse. There were forests with leaves that were like sharp swords and
razors. The place was spread with heated sand and there were rocks that were made out iron. In every direction,
there were iron pots, with concoctions made out of boiling oil. There were cotton plants that were difficult to
touch, with sharp thorns. Kounteya witnessed the pains that the performers of evil deeds had to undergo.

'Noticing the vile stench, he spoke to the messenger of the gods. "How far must we progress in this fashion?
Where are my brothers? You should explain that to me. What place of the gods is this? I wish to know that." Hearing what Dharmaraja had said, the messenger of the gods stopped. He said, "You must go on. The residents of
heaven have told me that I must return from here. O Indra among kings! However, if you are exhausted, you need
not go on." Yudhishthira was distressed and senseless with the stench. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having made up his mind to return, he started to retreat. The one with dharma in his soul was overcome with sorrow
and grief and started to return. He then heard distressed voices speaking in every direction. "O one who knows
about dharma! O rajarshi! O one who has a sacred birth! O Pandava! Show us your favours and stay here for an
instant. O unassailable one! Because of your arrival, an auspicious breeze has begun to blow. O father[The word used is tata. Given the context, it can be translated as both son and father, though father fits better.]! It bears
your fragrance and fills us with happiness. O Partha! O bull among men! O supreme among kings! It has been a
long time and we are delighted that we have met you. O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Remain here for a short while. O Kouravya! While you are here, our pain is restricted." There were many such distressed words, full of pain. O king! In that spot, he heard such voices from every direction. Hearing their words, he
was distressed and filled with compassion. Yudhishthira remained there and exclaimed, "This is terrible suffering."

He heard those words repeatedly and these seemed to be voices he had heard before. They were full of pain and
suffering, but Pandava did not recognize them.

'Unable to understand, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, spoke these words. "Who are you and why are you here?"

Having been thus addressed, all of them replied from every direction. "O lord! I am Karna. I am Bhimasena. I am
Arjuna. I am Nakula. I am Sahadeva. I am Dhrishtadyumna. I am Droupadi. We are Droupadi's sons." These were
the voices that were raised. O king! In that place, he heard such words. The king wondered, "What kind of contrary destiny is this? What tainted deeds have these great-souled ones, Karna, Droupadi's sons and the slender-
waisted Panchali, performed? Why are they in this extremely terrible place, with the fetid scent? All of them are
the performers of good deeds and I do not know of any wicked deeds that they have performed. What has Dhritarashtra's son, King Suyodhana, done? With all his wicked followers, he is full of prosperity. His prosperity is like
that of the great Indra and he is extremely revered. What perversity has led to these people going to hell? All of
them are brave and learned about dharma. They have been devoted to truth and the sacred texts. They were devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. They were wise. They performed sacrifices and gave away a large quantity of gifts.
Am I asleep or awake? Am I conscious or unconscious? Perhaps there is a defect in my consciousness. Perhaps my
consciousness is deluded." Thus, King Yudhishthira pondered in many ways. He was overcome by sorrow and
grief. Because of such thoughts, his senses became anxious. The king who was Dharma's son was filled with great
rage. Yudhishthira censured the gods and dharma. Tormented by the terrible stench, he addressed the messenger of
the gods. "O fortunate one! Go to those who have sent you as a messenger. I will not go to them. Go and tell them
that I will remain here. O messenger! I will be happy with my brothers here." The messenger was thus addressed
by Pandu's intelligent son. He went to the place where Shatakratu, the king of the gods, was, and told him what
Dharmaraja desired. O lord of men! He also told him everything that Dharma's son had said.'
