'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! In that battle, tell me how Yuyudhana countered Bharadvaja's son. I am extremely curious to hear the details."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! O immensely intelligent one! Listen. That encounter between Drona and the Pandavas, with Yuyudhana at the forefront, made the body hair stand up. O venerable one! On seeing that the army
had been slaughtered by Yuyudhana, Drona himself advanced against Satyaki, for whom, truth was his valour. On
seeing the maharatha who was Bharadvaja's son suddenly descend, Satyaki pierced him with twenty-five kshudraka arrows. Drona was valorous in battle. Steadfastly and swiftly, he pierced Yuyudhana with five gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone. These drank up the blood of the enemy. O king! They penetrated the extremely firm armour and penetrated the earth, like sighing serpents. The long-armed one became angry, like an elephant urged with a goad. He pierced Drona with five hundred iron arrows that were like fire. In that battle, Bharadvaja's son was thus quickly pierced by Yuyudhana. Taking care, he pierced Satyaki with many arrows. The immensely strong and great archer became enraged. He afflicted Satvata with one hundred arrows with drooping
tufts. O lord of the battle! For a short while, thus pierced in that battle by Bharadvaja's son, Satyaki did not know
what he should do. O king! On seeing Bharadvaja's son release sharp arrows in that battle, Yuyudhana's face
looked distressed.

'"O lord of the earth! On seeing him in this state, your sons and the soldiers were delighted in their minds and
repeatedly roared like lions. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this terrible roar and on seeing that Madhava was thus oppressed, Yudhishthira spoke to all the soldiers. 'This brave Satyaki, the performer of
truthful deeds, is supreme among the Vrishni lineage. He is being devoured in the battle by the brave one[Drona.], like
the sun by Rahu. Go quickly to the spot where Satyaki is fighting.' The lord of men spoke to Dhrishtadyumna from
Panchala. 'O Parshata! Attack Drona quickly. Why are you waiting? Can you not see the terrible danger that confronts us because of Drona? This Drona is a great archer. In the battle, he is playing with Yuyudhana, like a child
with a bird that is tied to a string. Let the rathas go there, with Bhimasena at the forefront, and with all of you, towards Satyaki's chariot. I will follow you, with my soldiers. Satyaki must be rescued now. He is within the jaws of
death.' Having spoken in this way, for Yuyudhana's sake, the king and all the Pandava soldiers attacked Drona in
that battle. O fortunate one! The Pandavas and all the Srinjayas raised a great roar there, as they fought with the
single-handed Drona.

'"Those tigers among men united against the maharatha who was Bharadvaja's son. They showered down sharp
arrows, tufted with the feathers of herons, peacocks and hawks. However, Drona smiled and received all those
brave ones himself, like receiving guests who have arrived, with seats and water. O king! Bharadvaja's archer son
tormented them with arrows, as if offering hospitality to guests who have arrived in a house. O lord! None of them
were capable of looking at Bharadvaja's son. He was like the one with a thousand rays[The sun.] when it is midday.
Drona, supreme among those who wield weapons, scorched all those great archers with the storm of his arrows,
like the sun with its rays. O king! The Pandavas and the Srinjayas were slaughtered in that battle and could see no
protector, like an elephant that is immersed in mud. Drona was seen to release great arrows. They travelled in the
sky and scorched all the directions, like the sun. Twenty-five Panchalas were killed by Drona. They were all famous as maharathas and had been honoured by Dhrishtadyumna. All the soldiers of the Pandus and the Panchalas
saw Drona kill the best of brave warriors. O great king! Having killed one hundred Kekayas and routed them in all
the directions, Drona was like Death with a gaping mouth. The mighty-armed Drona defeated hundreds and thousands of Panchalas, Srinjayas, Matsyas, Kekayas and Pandavas. They were pierced by Drona's arrows and emitted
a mighty sound, like the residents of a forest when the forest is consumed by a fire[The text uses the word dhumaketu. Dhumaketu has different meanings. Given the context, fire is most
appropriate.]. O king! The gods, the
gandharvas and the ancestors said, 'The Panchalas and the Pandavas are being driven away, with all their soldiers.'

When Drona thus slaughtered the Somakas in the encounter, no one dared to advance against him in the battle and
no one could pierce him.

'"While that terrible destruction of the best of brave ones was going on, Partha[Yudhishthira.] suddenly heard the sound of
Panchajanya being blown. Blown by Vasudeva, that king of conch shells emitted a terrible blare. As the brave ones
who were protecting Saindhava fought and the sons of Dhritarashtra roared and advanced towards Vijaya's
chariot[Vijaya is one of Arjuna's names.], the twang of Gandiva could not be heard in any direction. The Pandava king lost his senses and
thought, 'There is no doubt that Partha is not well, since the king of conch shells is blaring. The Kouravas are repeatedly roaring in delight.' Having thought in this way, Ajatashatru became anxious. Kounteya repeatedly spoke
to Satvata, as if he was bereft of his senses and in a voice choking with tears.

'"He thought about everything that should be done next and spoke to Shini's descendant, the bull of the Shini
lineage. 'O Shini's descendant! There is an eternal dharma that has been indicated by the virtuous ones from ancient times and this is for well-wishers who are in distress. That time has now arrived. O bull among the Shini lineage! O Satyaki! Having considered all the warriors and having thought about it, I do not know of a greater wellwisher than you. You have always been affectionate towards us. You have always been devoted to us. It is my view
that it is such a person who must be used in times of distress. Keshava has always been the refuge of the Pandavas.
O Varshneya! You have also been like that and you are Krishna's equal in valour. I will impose this burden on you
and you should not refuse me. You should never act contrary to my intentions. He[Arjuna.] is your brother and your
friend. He is your preceptor in battle[Satyaki studied fighting under Arjuna.]. O bull among men! Perform this hardship to help Arjuna. You are devoted to the truth. You are brave. You free your friends from fear. You are famous in the worlds. O brave one! You are
the performer of deeds. You are truthful in speech. O Shini's descendant! One who gives up his body while fighting for his friends, is the equal of someone who has followed the proper rites and has donated the entire earth to
brahmanas. We have heard of many kings who have ascended to heaven, after having followed the proper rites and
having donated the entire earth to brahmanas. You have dharma in your soul. I am begging you, with my hands
joined in salutation. O lord! Obtain fruits that are the equal of donating the earth, or something higher. There is one
named Krishna who is always the dispeller of the fears of his friends and is ready to give up his life in battle[For the sake of the friends.]. O
Satyaki! You are the second such. Desiring fame, it is only a brave one who can provide succour to a brave one in
battle. O Madhava! In times of supreme hardship like this, it is only a brave one who can be an aide, not an ordinary person. There is no one other than you who can protect Vijaya in battle. Pandava has boasted about your hundreds of deeds and has talked about them repeatedly, creating delight in me. "He is dexterous in using
weapons[Though not clearly stated, these are effectively Arjuna's words.]. He is a colourful fighter. There is lightness in his valour. He is wise in all weapons. He is brave. He
does not get confused in battle. He is broad in the shoulders. He is broad in the chest. He is mighty-armed. He
wields a giant bow. He is immensely strong. He is immensely valorous. He is great-souled. He is a maharatha. He
is my student. He is my friend. I love him and he loves me. Yuyudhana will be my aide and will crush the
Kouravas. O Indra among kings! O great king! Even if Keshava, Rama[Balarama.], Aniruddha[Pradyumna's son and Krishna's grandson. Pradyumna was the son of Krishna and Rukmini.], maharatha Pradyumna,
Gada[Krishna's brother.], Samba[The son of Krishna and Jambavati.] and all the Vrishnis armour themselves for our sake and seek to help us in the forefront of the
battle, I will appoint Shini's descendant, that tiger among men, for whom truth is his valour, as our aide. There is
no one else who is his equal." O son[The word used is tata.]! This is what Dhananjaya told me in Dvaitavana, when you were not
present. He recounted your qualities in an assembly of noble ones. O Varshneya! You should not belie the expectations of Dhananjaya, Bhima, or me. While on the visit to the tirthas, I had gone to Dvaraka. There, I had witnessed
your devotion to Arjuna. O Shini's descendant! While we were in Upaplavya, I did not witness in anyone else the
affection of heart towards us that you possessed. You have been born in a noble lineage. You are devoted to us.
You are your preceptor's friend. O Madhava! You are a well-wisher. You are brave. You have been born in a noble
lineage! O mighty-armed one! You are truthful. Show compassion towards Partha. O great archer! You should act
in a deserving way. Suyodhana was armoured by Drona and has suddenly gone towards Vijaya, where the Kourava
maharathas had gone earlier. A great sound can be heard there. O Shini's descendant! O Madhava! You should
swiftly go there. If Drona advances against you, Bhimasena and we, and all our soldiers, will prepare ourselves
and counter him. O Shini's descendant! Behold. The soldiers of the Bharatas are being routed in the battle and as
they are running away in the encounter, are uttering sounds of woe. It is like the ocean on the night of the new or
full moon, driven by the force of the great wind. O son! The army of the sons of Dhritarashtra is being scattered by
Savyasachi. Chariots, men and horses are quickly running away. The dust raised by the soldiers is spreading everywhere. The brave Phalguna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, has been surrounded by the brave Sindhus and the
Souviras, who are fighting with nails and lances, and is severely afflicted. Without countering these forces, it is impossible to kill Jayadratha. All of them are prepared to give up their lives for Saindhava's sake. There is a forest of
arrows, spears and standards. There are large numbers of horses and elephants. Behold. The forces of the sons of
Dhritarashtra are extremely difficult to assail. Hear the roar of the drums and the magnificent sound of conch
shells. They are roaring like lions and there is the clatter of chariot wheels. Hear the sounds of the elephants and
thousands of infantry. Listen. The earth is trembling because the riders are running. Saindhava's array is in front of
him and Drona's array is at the rear. O tiger among men! There are so many that even Indra of the gods would be
afflicted. He is immersed in an unlimited force and may lose his life. If he is killed in the battle, how can someone
like me remain alive? Even if I were to obtain everything, life would be a hardship. Gudakesha is dark and young.
Pandava is handsome. He possesses weapons. He is colourful in fighting. O son! The mighty-armed one has penetrated the army of the Bharatas at the time of sunrise. The day is almost over. O Varshneya! I do not know whether
he is alive or not. This army of the Kurus is as large as an ocean. O son! The mighty-armed Bibhatsu has penetrated the army of the Bharatas alone and in a great battle, even the gods are incapable of resisting it. In today's battle,
my mind does not know what to do. Drona is violent in the battle and is oppressing my forces. O mighty-armed
one! You can see how that brahmana is roaming around. When several tasks present themselves, you are skilled in
knowing which should be done. O Madhava! You should do what is the most important. You have always known
which among several tasks should be performed first. In this battle, it is my view that Arjuna's rescue is the immediate task. I do not sorrow over Dasharha. He is the protector and the lord of the universe. O son! O tiger among
men! Even if the three worlds assemble together in battle, he is capable of withstanding them and defeating them,
not to speak of this extremely weak force of the sons of Dhritarashtra. I tell you this truthfully. O Varshneya! But
Arjuna is afflicted by many warriors. He may give up his life in the battle and that is the reason I am distressed.
Therefore, follow in his footsteps. That is the way someone like you must tread at a time like this, especially when
you are urged by someone like me. In a battle, among the foremost ones of the Vrishni lineage, two have been said
to be atirathas. These are the mighty-armed Pradyumna and the illustrious Satvata[That is, Satyaki himself.]. You are equal to Narayana
in weapons and equal to Samkarshana[Balarama.] in strength. O tiger among men! You are Dhananjaya's equal in valour.
You surpass Bhishma and Drona and all those who are skilled in fighting. In this world, the virtuous ones have
spoken of you as a tiger among men. O Madhava! It has been said that there is nothing in the world that Satyaki
cannot perform. O immensely strong one! Therefore, do what I am asking you to do. You should do what all the
worlds and both the Parthas[Yudhishthira and Arjuna.] are asking you to do. O mighty-armed one! You should not act contrary to those
wishes. Give up your beloved life in this battle and roam around like a brave one. O Shini's descendant! Those
from the Dasharha lineage do not seek to protect their lives in battle. Staying in a battle without fighting and running away-those paths followed by cowards are not followed by those of the Dasharha lineage. O son! Arjuna is
your preceptor. O bull among the Shini lineage! You have dharma in your soul. Vasudeva is your senior and so is
the intelligent Partha. Knowing of both these reasons[The duty of a Dasharha and the duty to Krishna and Arjuna.], I am addressing these words to you. Do not disregard my
words. I am senior to your seniors and this is approved of by both Vasudeva and Arjuna. I am telling you this truthfully. Go to the spot where Dhananjaya is. O one for whom truth is valour! Follow these words of mine. O son!
Penetrate the forces of the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra. Having penetrated in the proper way, encounter those
maharathas. O Satvata! In the battle, display the deeds that are worthy of your own self.'"'
