Vaishampayana said, 'The best among the Bharata lineage met each other. They were devoid of anger and jealousy. All of them had cleansed their sins. They resorted to the sacred rites that had been laid down by the brahmana rishis. All of them were cheerful in their minds, like immortals in the world of the gods. O king! Sons met
fathers and mothers, wives met husbands, brothers met brothers and friends met friends. Happily, the Pandavas
met the great archer, Karna, Subhadra's son and all of Droupadi's sons. Karna and the Pandavas were delighted to
meet each other. All the kings met each other affectionately. Through the favours of the rishi, all rage in the other
kshatriyas was destroyed. They abandoned enmity and resorted to affection. In this way, all of them, the tigers
among the Kurus and the other men, met their seniors and their relatives and sons. Cheerful in their minds, they
passed that entire night. The kings were content and thought that they were in heaven. There was no sorrow, no
fear, no terror, no desire and no fame. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The warriors met each other. Having met
their fathers, brothers, husbands and sons, the women obtained great happiness and abandoned all their grief. The
brave ones and their wives spent a night of pleasure together. They embraced each other and then returned to wherever they had come from. The bull among sages gave those people leave to depart. While everyone looked on, they
disappeared in an instant[While the living looked on, the dead vanished.]. The great-souled ones were submerged in the sacred river that has three flows. With
their chariots and their standards, they returned to their own abodes. Some went to the world of the gods, others to
Brahma's abode. Some went to Varuna's world, others obtained Kubera's abode. Some of those kings obtained the
world of Vaivasvata. Some went to the worlds of the rakshasas and pishachas, others to Uttara Kuru. The progress
of all of them was wonderful, as some went with the immortals. The great-souled ones left with their mounts and
their followers.

'The great sage was still standing in the water. He was devoted to dharma and immensely energetic, engaged in
the welfare of the Kurus. When all of them had gone, he spoke to the kshatriya ladies who had lost their husbands.

"Let the best among women who  desire the worlds  obtained by  their husbands  swiftly and faithfully immerse
themselves in the waters of the Jahnavi." Hearing those words, those beautiful women behaved faithfully. Obeying
their father-in-law, they entered the waters of the Jahnavi. O lord of the earth! All those virtuous women were
freed from their human bodies and departed with their husbands. In this way, all those virtuous women of the lineage entered the water, were freed and went to the worlds obtained by their husbands. They had divine forms.
They were adorned in divine ornaments. There were divine garments and garlands. They went where their husbands were. They were spirited and possessed good conduct. All of them possessed all the good qualities. Freed
from sin, they vanished and obtained their own respective abodes. Vyasa was the granter of boons and devoted to
dharma. At that time, he satisfied the wishes of everyone[The living.]. There were people who had assembled from many
countries. On hearing of this encounter between those gods among men and the men who had returned, they were
greatly delighted. A man who listens to this account of the encounter between those who loved each other, always
obtains good things, in this world and in the next. He obtains benefits and is united with his relatives. His mind is
at ease. A learned man who makes others listen to this obtains supreme success. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Men who observe rites and study this are united with the yoga of adhyatma and become intelligent men.
Those who hear this parva recited always obtain supreme success.'
