'Sanjaya said, "O great king! After some time, a tumultuous sound could be heard, when the warriors prepared to
fight, and it made the heart tremble. There were the sounds of conch shells and drums. Elephants trumpeted. The
wheels of the chariots thundered and the earth seemed to be torn apart. The horses neighed. The warriors roared. O
unassailable one! The armies of your sons and those of the Pandavas encountered each other and trembled. The
elephants and the chariots were decorated with gold and were seen to be radiant, like clouds with lightning. O lord
of men! Those on your side had many different kinds of standards. They were adorned with golden rings and
shone like the fire. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those on your side 44 and those on the side of the enemy
were seen to be as pure as the great Indra's standard, in the great Indra's abode. The brave ones were clad in golden armour. They blazed like the fiery sun. Armoured, they seemed to be like the blazing planets. They held upraised weapons and wore guards on their palms. They possessed standards. They had eyes like bulls. They were
great archers and placed themselves at the forefront. O lord of men! Among your sons, there were those who protected Bhisma from the rear-Duhshasana, Durvisaha, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Vivimshati, Chitrasena and maharatha Vikarna. There were also Satyavrata, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhurishrava and Shala. They were followed by
twenty thousand chariots. Abhishaha, Shurasena, Shibi, Vasati, Shalva, Matysa, Ambashtha, Trigarta, Kekaya,
Souvira, Kitava and those from the east, west and the north Malava-all the brave ones from these twelve regions
45 advanced, ready to give up their lives. They protected the grandfather with an array of large chariots. With an
army that consisted of ten thousand swift elephants, the king of Magadha followed that array of chariots. Those
who protected the wheels of chariots and the feet of the elephants in the midst of that army numbered six million.
The infantry marched in advance, with bows, shields and swords in their hands. There were many hundreds and
thousands of them and they fought with nails and lances. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! The
eleven akshouhinis of your sons looked like the Ganga separated from the Yamuna."'
