Bhishma said, "All the maharshis began to follow these rites and observing the rituals, began to undertake the
indicated tasks at funeral ceremonies for the ancestors. The rishis always acted in accordance with dharma.
Firm in their vows, after the ceremony, they started to offer water at the tirthas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Satisfied with the oblations offered by the four varnas, the ancestors and the gods were content and began to
eat the food. However, the gods and the ancestor suffered because the food wasn't digested. Afflicted by indigestion, they went to Soma. The ancestors, suffering from indigestion, approached Soma and said, 'We are oppressed
because of this indigestion. Determine what is best for us.' Desiring what was good for the gods, Soma replied,
'Go to Svayambhu's abode. He will determine what is best for you.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hearing
Soma's words, the gods and the ancestors went to the grandfather, who was seated on the summit of Meru. The ancestors said, 'O illustrious one! We are suffering from not being able to digest the food. O  god! Show  us  our
favours and determine what will be good for us.' Hearing their words, Svayambhu told the ones who were suffering from the excess. 'This Agni is by my side. He will determine what is good for you.' Agni said, 'O fathers!
When the oblations are presented before us, we will eat together. If you eat with me, there is no doubt that you will
be able to digest the food.' On hearing this, the anxiety of the ancestors was dispelled. O king! O bull among men!
That is the reason why, when oblations are offered at funeral ceremonies, a share of the oblations is first offered to
Agni. Brahma-rakshasas[A brahmana who becomes a rakshasa.] are then unable to cause any harm at a funeral ceremony. Seeing that Agni is there, the
rakshasas run away. The funeral cake must first be offered to the father and next to the paternal grandfather. It
should then be offered to the paternal great grandfather. This is said to be the ritual connected with a funeral ceremony. While controlled, one must utter the savitri mantra over each funeral cake that is offered. One must also
state that the soma is being offered for the sake of the ancestors. A woman who is in her season or a woman with
mutilated  ears  should  not  be  present  at  a  funeral  ceremony.  Nor  should  a  woman  from  some  other  family  be
present. When one traverses a body of water, one must mention the names of the ancestors. Having approached a
river, one must offer oblations of water to the ancestors. Once one has offered oblations of water to those from
one's own family, one should then offer oblations of water to groups of well-wishers and relatives[Not directly belonging to the family and of course, those who are dead.]. When one
crosses a body of water on a cart that is yoked to two black[Alternatively, speckled with black.] bulls, or astride a boat, the ancestors desire obla-
tions. Those who know this, always offer water in a controlled way. The funeral ceremony must be performed in
that half of the month that is krishnapaksha. If one is devoted to the ancestors, nourishment, long life, valour and
prosperity follow. O best among those of the Kuru lineage! The grandfather, Pulastya, Vasishtha, Pulaha, Angiras,
Kratu and the great rishi, Kashyapa-these are known as the great lords of yoga. These are also ancestors. O king!
This is the supreme ritual of a funeral ceremony. Through the act of offering funeral cakes to the deceased relatives, they are freed. O best among men! I have thus told you how the funeral ceremony originated. It was established through the ancient ordinances. I will next tell you about donations."'
