Sanjaya said, "Jishnu again returned, like the planet Angaraka[Mars.] in its forward and retrograde motions, to kill
large numbers of samshaptakas. O king! O venerable one! Men, horses, rathas and elephants were killed by
Partha's arrows. They wavered, wandered around, shrieked, fell down and died. Large numbers of charioteers and
chariots were flung away. There were hands, with weapons still in the hands, and arms and heads. Pandava severed
them with broad-headed and razor-sharp arrows, arrows that were in the shape of a half-moon and arrows that had
heads like a calf's tooth, as those enemy heroes fought against him in that battle. They fought, like a bull that desires intercourse fighting against another bull. Hundreds and thousands of brave ones descended on Arjuna. The
encounter between them and him was extraordinary and it made the body hair stand up. It was as if the daityas
were fighting with the wielder of the vajra for the conquest of the three worlds. Ugrayudha pierced him with three
arrows that were like malignant snakes[A specific type of malignant snake called dandashuka.], but he severed his[Ugrayudha's.] head from his body. All of them[The other warriors.] became extremely angry and showered down many weapons on Arjuna, like clouds urged by the Maruts surrounding the Himalayas at the end of summer. With his own weapons, Arjuna countered all the weapons of his enemies. He used
many well-directed arrows to kill all those who meant to injure him. The trivenus were shattered around their
thighs. The parshni[Parshni has different meanings. When four horses are attached to a
chariot, it means one of the outside horses. It can also mean one of the
two charioteers who drive the outside horses, as opposed to the main
charioteer (sarathi), or someone who guards the axles.] charioteers were killed. The harnesses were torn and the poles, axles, joints and yokes of
chariots were shattered. Using his arrows, Arjuna swiftly destroyed all their equipment. There were large numbers
of chariots there, fragmented into pieces. They looked like the palaces of the rich, destroyed by the fire, the wind
and the rain. Arrows that were like the vajra mangled the inner organs of the elephants and they fell down, resembling mansions on mountains destroyed by thunder, storm and fire. Persecuted by Arjuna, large numbers of horses
and riders fell down on the ground. Their tongues lolled out. Their entrails were plucked out. They were weak.
They were covered in blood. They looked terrible. Savyasachi's iron arrows struck men, horses and elephants. O
venerable one! They tottered, shrieked, fell down and died. Like the great Indra against the danavas, Partha killed
the inferior ones with arrows that were sharpened on stone and were like the vajra or like virulent poison. There
were brave ones, with extremely expensive armour and ornaments. They possessed diverse kinds of garments and
weapons. With their chariots and their standards, they were slain by Partha and forced to lie down. They were the
performers of pious deeds. They were distinguished and famous. Nevertheless, they were vanquished and died.
They conquered heaven because of their deeds, but their bodies lay down on the ground. The brave ones on your
side attacked Arjuna's chariot. They were the leaders of many different countries and they, and their followers,
were full of rage. They were on chariots and horses and the foot soldiers also desired to kill him. They quickly
rushed against him, with many different kinds of weapons. Those warriors angrily showered down a large number
of weapons, as if from a giant cloud. However, like the wind, Arjuna swiftly dispelled them with his sharp arrows.
Using his own weapons as a bridge, Partha violently crossed that large and boatless ocean of weapons, horses, infantry, elephants and chariots.

' "Vasudeva spoke to him. 'O Partha! O unblemished one! Why are you toying with them? Crush the samshaptakas and make haste towards Karna's death.' Having been thus addressed, Arjuna swiftly struck the remaining
samshaptakas. He powerfully unleashed his weapons and killed them, like Indra against the daityas. In that battle,
no one could distinguish when Arjuna took out an arrow, affixed it and released it. He was that swift. As he goaded
his horses, Govinda himself said that it was extraordinary. As they penetrated the soldiers, his arrows were like
white and swift swans diving into a lake. The field of battle was full of the destruction of men. On seeing this,
Govinda spoke to Savyasachi. 'O Partha! A great and extremely terrible destruction of the Bharatas, the earth and
the kings is going on. This is because of Duryodhana's extremely evil deeds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Behold the bows, with golden backs, of the archers. The large armour and quivers have been dislodged. The arrows have drooping tufts and the tufts are made out of gold. The iron arrows have been washed in oil and are like
snakes that have cast off their skins. The place is strewn with colourful lances and bows that are decorated in gold.
The swords have handles of ivory and are embellished in gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The armour
and sheaths for the bows possess golden backs. The lances and spears are embellished with gold and are also decorated in gold. The giant clubs are tied in garments that are decorated with gold. The handles of the swords are
made out of gold and the battleaxes are also embellished in gold. The handles of the scattered battleaxes are ornamented in gold. Lances made of iron and heavy bludgeons have fallen down. Behold the colourful shataghnis and
the large maces. There are many chakras[If chakra has to be translated, it can only be translated as disc or discus.
The chakra is Vishnu and Krishna's weapon.] and clubs that have been scattered around in this battle. There are
many kinds of weapons that were grasped by the ones who desired victory. Their bodies have been crushed by
clubs and bludgeons and their heads have been smashed. Behold the thousands of elephants, horses, chariots and
warriors who have been destroyed. Men, elephants and horses have been struck with arrows, lances, swords,
spears, scimitars, javelins, spikes, nails and bludgeons. Their bodies have been mangled in many ways and they are
covered in blood. O destroyer of enemies! They have lost their lives and are strewn around in this field of battle.
Their arms are smeared with sandalwood paste and adorned with armlets and sparkling ornaments. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The earth is resplendent with arm-guards and bracelets. The ornamented tips of the hands,
with finger-guards, are scattered around[The hands having been severed. The heads have also been severed.]. The supreme heads sport gems on the headdresses and wear earrings.
Those with eyes like bulls have been brought down and the earth looks dazzling. There are headless torsos covered
in blood, since the heads have been severed from the bodies. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! They are
scattered on the ground and it is as if the fiery flames of the fire have been pacified. Many kinds of chariots, with
sparkling golden bells, have been shattered. Behold the many horses, covered in blood. The place is strewn with
the white and giant conch shells of the warriors. As they lie down like mountains, the tongues of the elephants are
lolling out. Sporting colourful flags of victory, warriors who fought on horses and elephants have been slain. There
are excellent cushions, covers and blankets from the elephants. They are diverse and have been uprooted. So have
the colourful and varied housings. Many bells have been broken, crushed by the feet of the elephants. Staffs and
goads decorated with lapis lazuli have fallen down on the ground. Harnesses were decorated with gold and so were
the tips of the standards that the riders possessed. They were colourful with many kinds of gems and were polished
in gold. From the horses, cushions and covers made out of the skin of ranku deer have fallen down on the ground.
The lords among men had gems on their headdresses and golden garlands. Umbrellas are scattered around and so
are fans and whisks. The faces of the kshatriyas have beautiful earrings and are as beautiful as the moon or nakshatras. The brave ones are ornamented and their beards have been clipped. Behold. Their heads are scattered around
on the ground, in the mire created by blood. Behold. The men who are still alive are lamenting in every direction.
O lord of the earth! There are many who are honouring you and others have been killed by your weapons. With
their relatives, they are repeatedly lamenting there. Though they have been routed, there are some spirited warriors
with angry faces. Driven by anger and desiring victory, they wish to advance and fight again. However, there are
other proud ones who are fleeing from the spot. Their relatives have fallen down and desire water from those brave
ones. O Arjuna! Some have gone in search of water and there are many who have lost their lives. It can be seen
that those brave ones have lost their senses and are retreating. Having seen water, they are rushing to the spot,
shouting at each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Behold the ones who have expired after drinking water and the others who are drinking. Others have abandoned their beloved ones, their beloved relatives, kith and
kin. In the great battle, they can be seen to be running around, here and there. O foremost among men! Behold the
others. They are repeatedly gnashing their teeth and biting their lips. O Arjuna! In the great battle today, these are
the deeds that you have performed. The deeds performed by you in the battle are like those of the king of the gods,
or those who live in heaven.' In this way, Krishna showed Kiriti the field of battle.

' "As they were returning, they heard a loud noise from Duryodhana's army. It was mixed with the blaring of
conch shells and the beating of drums and kettledrums and mingled with the fierce sound of weapons and roars of
chariots, horses and elephants. Borne by horses that were as fast as the wind, Krishna penetrated that army and was
surprised to see that your army was being crushed by Pandya. That foremost among warriors was using many different kinds of arrows. He was slaying the enemy, like Yama among those whose life has run out. The foremost
among strikers was mangling the bodies of elephants, horses and men with his sharp arrows and was robbing them
of their bodies. With many weapons and arrows, he was piercing heroes among the enemy. Pandya was killing the
enemy, like Shakra against the asuras." '
