Vaishampayana said, 'Her beautiful face was crimson with anger. Her eyes were red with anger. Her knitted brows
were raised. With her face suffused, Drupada's daughter again spoke to the king of Souvira. "You have insulted
famous maharathas whose poison is virulent. O foolish one! Do you have no shame? Each of them is like the great
Indra and is devoted to his own task. They have not wavered in battle against yakshas and rakshasas. O Suvira!
Never speak ill of an ascetic, who is full of knowledge and deserves to be praised, whether he roams in the forest
or lives the life of a householder. Only dogs speak like that. You will descend into the mouth of hell that has now
opened. I do not think that there is anyone in this great assembly of kshatriyas who can hold you by the hand and
prevent this. You hope to defeat and kill Dharmaraja. The rutting elephant is like the peak of a mountain and roams
around in the valleys of the Himalayas. You are like a man who wishes to chase it from its herd, armed only with a
stick. You are childish. The immensely strong lion was asleep. You have woken it, trying to pluck eyelashes from
its face. You will have to run away, when you see the wrathful Bhimasena. The immensely strong, terrible and fully grown lion was asleep in its mountainous cavern. Like a man who has kicked it, you wish to counter the angry
and terrible Jishnu[Arjuna's name.]. You are like a mad man, who has stamped with his feet on the backs of two dark, fork-
tongued serpents, virulent in their poison. You are seeking to battle with two brave men, the youngest of the Pandavas. The bamboo, the reed and the plantain bear fruit. But then they die and do not grow in size. A crab conceives only so as to perish. Like that, you wish to grasp me, although I am protected by them."

'Jayadratha said, "O Krishna! I know all this and I know what those sons of kings are like. But you will not be
able to frighten me with those threats now. O Krishna! We have all been born in the seventeen noble lineages[Different dynasties and lineages are listed in different places. They don't quite add up to seventeen, the number is actually more. So it isn't clear which are the seventeen Jayadratha is referring to.].
We possess the six qualities[Valour, power, poise, dexterity, generosity and kingship.]. O Droupadi! We think that the sons of Pandu are devoid of these. Therefore, swiftly ascend this elephant or this chariot. You cannot dissuade us with words alone. Hope, by lamenting piteously,
that you are able to obtain the favours of the king of Souvira."

'Droupadi replied, "Though I am extremely powerful, the king of Souvira now takes me to be weak. He thinks
that I am not sure of myself and therefore, I will plead and demean myself before the king of Souvira. Both Krishnas[Krishna and Arjuna. Though rarely used, Krishna is also a name for Arjuna.] will follow my footsteps, riding together on a single chariot. Indra himself cannot abduct me, not to speak of
a weak and wretched human. Kiriti[Arjuna's name. Literally, the one with a diadem on his head.], the slayer of enemy heroes, terrifies the hearts of enemies on his chariot.
When he enters your army for my sake, he will consume it like the summer's dry wood. Janardana[Krishna.], followed by
Vrishni warriors, all the mighty archers from the Kekaya lineage, and all the other princes, will happily follow my
footsteps. The arrows released from Gandiva by Dhananjaya's arms are extremely swift and make a thunderous
noise. They will make a terrible roar. The large showers of arrows released from Gandiva are extremely swift and
are like locusts. There will be the roar of conch shells and the roar of leather gloves. The wielder of the Gandiva
will release them repeatedly. When those arrows pierce your chest, what thoughts will pass through your mind?
You will see Bhima advance, with a mace in his hand. Madri's two sons will stride in every direction, vomiting the
poison of their anger. O wretched one! You will repent this for a very long time. In my thoughts, I have never been
false to my husbands, extremely deserving of respect. Because of that truth, I will see you bound and dragged by
the sons of Pritha. I may be violently seized by you. But you are incapable of frightening me. I will encounter
those braves of the Kuru lineage and return again to Kamyaka forest."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Her eyes were dilated. She saw that they were about to seize her and remonstrated with
them again. She cried out in fear, "Do not touch me." She also sought help with the priest, Dhoumya. Jayadratha
grasped her by her upper garment, but she forcibly pushed him away. Pushed by her, that evil one fell, like a tree
that has been uprooted. However, she was seized again with great force and the princess began to sigh repeatedly.
Krishna showed obeisance at Dhoumya's feet and then Krishna was made to ascend the chariot. Dhoumya said,
"Without vanquishing the maharathas, you cannot take her away. O Jayadratha! You should remember the ancient
dharma of the kshatriyas. There is no doubt that you will reap the fruits of this mean and evil act. You will encounter the brave Pandavas, with Dharmaraja at the forefront." The famous princess was being carried away. Having said this, Dhoumya followed, by entering the ranks of the infantry.'
