Vaishampayana said, 'O king! When the Indra among the Kouravas left for the forest, the Pandavas were overwhelmed by sorrow and grief and were also miserable on account of their mother. All the citizens grieved
about the king. The brahmanas conversed about the king. "How will the aged king dwell in that desolate forest?
What about the immensely fortunate Gandhari and Pritha Kunti? The rajarshi deserved happiness. How will he
find joy in that great forest? With his sons killed, what will be the state of the one who has wisdom for his sight?
On being separated from her sons, Kunti has done something that is extremely difficult. She has abandoned the
prosperity of the kingdom, cherishing life in the forest instead. What is the state of Vidura, who devotes himself to
serving his brother? Gavalgana's intelligent son is the one who protects the legacy of his lord." The citizens, even
the young, were afflicted by thoughts and sorrow. Here and there, they conversed in this way with each other. All
the Pandavas were severely afflicted by grief. For a long time, they sorrowed over their mother, just as they had
done so earlier. They also grieved over their father, the aged king who had lost his sons, the immensely fortunate
Gandhari and the immensely intelligent Vidura. As they thought in this way, they could find no pleasure, not in the
kingdom, not in women and not in studying the Vedas. Thinking about the king, they were overcome with supreme
disregard for everything material. They repeatedly remembered the terrible slaughter of the kin, the destruction of
the young Abhimanyu in the forefront of the battle and that of the mighty-armed Karna, who did not retreat from
an encounter. There were the sons of Droupadi and other well-wishers. Remembering the slaughter of those brave
ones, they were cheerless. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave ones on earth had been killed, the jewels had been destroyed. They always thought about this and could not sleep. The sons of the queens, Droupadi and
the beautiful Subhadra, had been killed. They were also cheerless and miserable. But they saw the son of Virata's
daughter, your father, Parikshit. That is the way your forefathers sustained their lives.'
