Janamejaya asked, 'O foremost among brahmanas! On hearing that Karna had been killed in that battle and that
his sons had run away, how was that Indra among kings assured and what did he say? Because of the great disaster that confronted his sons, he suffered from supreme grief. What did he say at that time? I am asking you. Tell
me.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'He heard of Karna's death, which was unbelievable and extraordinary. It was so terrible that it paralysed all beings, as if Mount Meru had moved. It was as if the senses of the immensely wise Bhargava[This Bhargava means Shukra, the preceptor of the demons and the fount of wisdom. Shukra was the son of the
sage Bhrigu.] had got confused, or that Indra, the performer of terrible deeds, had been defeated and shattered by his enemies. It was as if the immensely radiant sun had fallen down from the sky onto the earth, or the unthinkable drying
up of the waters from the ocean. It was as extraordinary as the earth, the sky and all the directions being destroyed.
It was as if both good and evil deeds had become fruitless. Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, used his intelligence to
skilfully think about this. With Karna killed, he thought that his side had been destroyed and came around to the
view that all the other beings would similarly be destroyed. He was scorched by the flames of sorrow and his heart
could find no solace. His soul was shattered and he sighed in distress. He was extremely miserable and lamented.
O great king! Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, lamented in woe.

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Adhiratha's son was brave. He was like a lion or an elephant in his valour. His
shoulders were like that of a bull. His eyes, gait and voice were like those of a bull. He was a bull and like a bull.
He was young and was capable of withstanding the vajra. He did not retreat from a battle, even if the adversary
were to be the great Indra. Because of his bowstring twanging against his palms and because of the shower of his
arrows, chariots, horses, men and elephants could not stand before him in a battle. He was mighty-armed and without decay. He was the slayer of large numbers of the enemy. Depending on him, Duryodhana ventured to provoke
an enmity with the immensely strong sons of Pandu. How could Karna, best of rathas, have been brought down by
Partha in the battle? He was capable of withstanding valour that is impossible to counter. How could that tiger
among men have been killed? Depending on the strength of his own arms, he never showed any reverence towards
Achyuta[The one without decay, Krishna's name.], Dhananjaya or the Vrishnis. 'The wielders of the Sharnga and Gandiva bows[Krishna and Arjuna respectively.] are undefeated. When
they are together, on their divine chariot, I will alone bring them down in the battle.' He always spoke these words
to the wicked and evil Duryodhana, who was afflicted by desire for the kingdom and was confused because of his
greed for what was undesirable. He is the one who defeated powerful enemies who were extremely difficult to vanquish-the Gandharas, the Madrakas, the Matsyas, the Trigartas, the Tanganas, the Shakas, the Panchalas, the
Videhas, the Kunindas, the Kashis, the Kosalas, the Suhmas, the Angas, the Pundras, the Nishadas, the Vangas, the
Kichakas, the Vatsas, the Kalingas, the Taralas, the Ashmakas and the Rishikas. In earlier times, using his strength,
the brave one defeated all of these in battles. Just as Uchchaihshrava[The name of Indra's horse, which arose from the churning of the ocean.] is supreme among horses, Vaishravana[Kubera.] is
supreme among yakshas[Yakshas are semi-divine species and companions of Kubera, the god of treasure.] and the great Indra is supreme among gods, Karna was supreme among those who
could strike. Having obtained and pacified him through riches and honours, the king of Magadha wished to fight
with all the kshatriyas on earth, with the exception of the Kouravas and the Yadavas[This is the story of an alliance between Jarasandha and Karna that does not figure in the Critical edition.]. On hearing of Karna's
death in the duel with Savyasachi, I am immersed in an ocean of grief. It is as if I am on an ocean without a boat. I
think that my heart cannot be shattered and must be harder than the vajra. I have heard about the defeat of my kin,
matrimonial allies and friends. O suta! Other than an unfortunate one like me, which other man in the world would
not have given up his life? I wish for poison, or fire. I desire to fall down from the summit of a mountain. O Sanjaya! I am incapable of bearing this misery and hardship."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! In prosperity, lineage, fame, austerities and learning, the virtuous ones regard you to
be the equal of Yayati, Nahusha's son. You are like a maharshi in your learning and are accomplished in your
deeds. Find solace inside your own self. Do not give way to this sorrow in your mind."

'Dhritarashtra said, "I think that destiny is supreme. Shame on manliness, it is futile. Karna was the equal of
Rama[Parashurama.] and has been killed in this battle. He killed Yudhishthira's soldiers and the Panchalas who roamed around
in their chariots. With his showers of arrows, the maharatha scorched all the directions. In the battle, he confounded the Parthas, like the wielder of the vajra against the asuras. How can he have been killed? How can he lie down,
like a tree that has been shattered by the storm? I do not see an end to my sorrows and seem to be in an endless
ocean. My anxiety is increasing. It is terrible. The desire to die is increasing. I have heard about Karna's death and
Phalguna's[Phalguna is Arjuna's name.] victory. But I do not think that Karna's death is believable. It is certain that my heart has the essence
of the vajra. It is extremely firm. On hearing about the death of Karna, tiger among men, it has not been shattered.
It is certain that, from earlier times, destiny has ordained an extremely long life for me. I am extremely miserable.
But despite hearing about Karna's death, I am still alive. O Sanjaya! I am without well-wishers now and shame on
this life. O Sanjaya! I have been reduced to this reprehensible state today. I am wicked in my understanding.
Everyone will grieve over my miserable state. Earlier, I used to be honoured by the entire world. O suta! Having
been defeated, how can I bear to remain alive? O Sanjaya! I have faced hardships and have moved from pain to
greater pain. There was Bhishma's death and then that of the great-souled Drona. With the son of the suta having
been killed in the battle, I do not see any remnants left. O Sanjaya! It was he who would have enabled my sons to
tide over this great enmity. The brave one released many arrows and has been slain in the battle. When that bull
among men has been killed, what is the point of my remaining alive? There is no doubt that the atiratha[An unrivalled warrior, whose valour is unlimited, greater than a maharatha.] was afflicted by arrows and fell down from his chariot. It was like the summit of a mountain, shattered by the vajra.
There is no doubt that he is lying down, adorning the earth, blood flowing from his wounds. He is like a crazy elephant, brought down by another elephant. He was the strength of the sons of Dhritarashtra and fear for the Pandavas. Karna was revered by all archers and has been slain by Arjuna. The brave and great archer granted my sons
freedom from fear. The brave one has been killed and is lying down, like Bala by Shakra[Indra (Shakra) killed a demon named Bala.]. Duryodhana's wishes
are now like a lame one desiring to walk, the wishes of a poor man being satisfied, or a thirsty man without drops
of water. We thought of one thing when performing our deeds, but it has turned out to be something else. Destiny
is powerful and time is extremely difficult to transgress.

' "O suta! What about my son, Duhshasana? When he was killed, was he running away? Was he weak, distressed in his soul and devoid of manliness? O son! Did he display inferior conduct in the battle? Was the brave
one killed like other kshatriyas on our side have been slain? Yudhishthira's words have always been against war.
They were like diet and medicine, but the foolish Duryodhana did not accept them. Bhishma was lying down on a
bed of arrows and desired a drink. The extremely great-souled Partha pierced the surface of the earth. O son! On
seeing the fountain of water that was created by the Pandava, the mighty-armed one spoke about peace with the
Pandavas. 'Be pacified. Let there be peace and let the hostilities of the war end. With fraternal feelings, enjoy the
earth with the sons of Pandu[This incident has been described towards the end of Section 64 (Volume 5). Bhishma addressed Duryodhana.].' My son did not act in accordance with those words and is no doubt sorrowing
now. What the far-sighted one stated in his words has now transpired. O Sanjaya! My advisers have been killed
and my sons have been slain. I have been reduced to this state because of the gambling match, like a bird without
wings. O Sanjaya! Boys cheerfully grasp birds in sport and having severed their wings, let them go. But because
their wings have been severed, they cannot fly away. I have been reduced to that state, like a bird without wings. I
am destitute and weak in every way. I am without relatives and kin. I am miserable and have come under the subjugation of my enemies. Which direction will I turn to? For the sake of Duryodhana's prosperity, the lord[Karna.] conquered the earth. He was valorous, but has been vanquished by the capable and brave Pandavas. When the great
archer, Karna, was killed in the battle by Kiriti, which brave ones surrounded him? O Sanjaya! Tell me that. When
he was slain by Pandava in the battle, I hope he was not abandoned and alone. O brave one! Earlier, you have told
me how the valiant ones were brought down. Bhishma, supreme among wielders of all weapons, did not fight back
and was brought down in the battle by Shikhandi's supreme arrows. Similarly, Drona, the great archer, cast aside
his weapons in the battle and immersed himself in yoga. O Sanjaya! He was already pierced with many arrows and
Dhrishtadyumna, Drupada's son, raised his sword and slew him. Both of them were killed through a weakness, especially through deceit. That is what I have heard about the way Bhishma and Drona were brought down. Even the
wielder of the vajra himself would not have been able to kill Bhishma and Drona in a battle, provided the fight
took place through fair means. I tell you this truthfully.

' "Karna must have unleashed many divine weapons. The brave one was Indra's equal. How could death have
touched him in the battle? He possessed a divine spear that was as radiant as lightning. It was decorated with gold
and was capable of killing the enemy. Purandara gave him that in exchange for the earrings[That spear could kill only one person and was used to kill Ghatotkacha, in Section 70 (Volume 6).]. Among the arrows
in his quiver, there was a divine arrow, decorated with gold. It was lying there and was smeared with sandalwood
paste. It had a serpent in its mouth and the slayer of enemies did not use it[This jumps the gun. In Section 19 (Volume 2), in the course of burning down the Khandava forest, Arjuna destroyed the serpents. Ashvasena, a serpent who escaped, vowed vengeance on Arjuna and became an arrow in
Karna's quiver.]. The brave one ignored maharathas
like Bhishma and Drona and learnt the extremely terrible brahmastra from Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.]. When the mighty-
armed one saw that Drona and the others were afflicted by the arrows released by Subhadra's son, he used his arrows to sever his[Abhimanyu's.] bow. Bhimasena possessed the strength of ten thousand elephants and the speed of the wind.
But the one without decay deprived him of his chariot and laughed at his brother[Since Karna was Kunti's son, Bhima was his brother.]. He conquered Sahadeva with
straight-tufted arrows. But having deprived him of his chariot, he took compassion on him and knowing about
dharma, did not kill him[Karna had given word to Kunti that barring Arjuna, he would not kill any of the other Pandavas.]. Ghatotkacha, Indra among the rakshasas, used a thousand different kinds of maya and
was crazy in the battle. But he destroyed all those and killed him with the spear that he had obtained from Shakra.
For all these days, Dhananjaya has been frightened of fighting a duel with him. The brave one was like an elephant. How could he have been killed in the battle? His chariot must have been shattered. His bow must have been
fragmented. His weapons must have been exhausted. Otherwise, how could he have been killed by the enemy?
When Karna brandished his gigantic bow, who was capable of standing against him in the battle? In the battle, he
released terrible arrows and divine weapons. Who could defeat that tiger among men? He was like a tiger in his
force. It is certain that his bow must have been shattered. His chariot must have got stuck in the ground. Else, his
weapons must have got exhausted, since you have told me that he has been killed. Without these being destroyed, I
can see no other reason for his death. 'Until I have killed Arjuna, I will not wash my feet.' This is the extremely
terrible vow that the great-souled one took. In the forest, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was always terrified of him. The
bull among men could not sleep for thirteen years[The period of exile.].

' "When my son forcibly brought the wife of the Pandus to the assembly hall, he depended on the valour and
bravery of the great-souled one. While the Pandavas looked on, in the midst of that assembly hall, in the assembly
of the Kurus, he[Karna. Panchali is Droupadi or Krishnaa.] had spoken to Panchali. 'You are the wife of slaves. You think that arrows released from Gan-
diva have the touch of the fire. O Krishna! They are no longer your husbands.' He said this while Partha looked on.
O Sanjaya! Depending on the strength of his own arms, not for a single moment was he frightened of the Parthas,
their sons, or of Janardana. O son! I do not think that he could have been killed even by the gods, with Vasava[Vasava is Indra's name.],
even if they had angrily rushed against him, not to speak of the Pandavas. When he touched the bowstring with his
finger-guards, which man was capable of standing before Adhiratha's son[Karna was reared by a suta named Adhiratha.]? It is possible for the earth to be deprived of the blazing rays of the sun or the moon. However, that Indra among men did not retreat from a battle and
his death is impossible. The wicked one, evil in his intelligence[Meaning Duryodhana.], obtained him as an aide and with his brother,
Duhshasana, rejected Vasudeva's desirable proposal[For peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).].

' "On seeing that Karna, with the shoulders of a bull, has been brought down and on seeing that Duhshasana has
been killed, I think that my son must be grieving. On hearing that Vaikartana has been killed in a duel with
Savyasachi and on witnessing the victory of the Pandavas, what did Duryodhana say? He heard that Durmarshana
and Vrishasena[Karna's son.] had been killed in the battle. He saw the army was shattered and was being slaughtered by the
maharathas. The kings were unwilling to fight and were running away. On seeing that the rathas were routed, I
think that my son must be grieving. He is extremely insolent and wrathful because of his childish intelligence. On
seeing that the army had lost its enterprise, what did Duryodhana say? On seeing that Bhimasena had killed his
brother in the battle and had drunk his blood, what did Duryodhana say? With the king of Gandhara[Shakuni.], he had
proclaimed in the assembly hall, 'Karna will kill Arjuna in the encounter.' On seeing him slain, what did he say?
Earlier, having deceived the Pandavas in the gambling match, Shakuni Soubala had rejoiced. O son! On seeing
Karna killed, what did he say? On seeing that Karna had been slain, what did the great archer, Hardikya Kritavarma, the maharatha of the Satvata lineage, say? Drona's son is intelligent. Brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas worship him, for the sake of learning about dhanurveda. He is young, handsome, qualified, beautiful and immensely
illustrious. O Sanjaya! On learning that Karna had been killed, what did Ashvatthama say? O son! Sharadvata Kripa is the preceptor in dhanurveda and possesses supreme knowledge[Before Drona arrived, Kripa taught the Kouravas and the Pandavas the art of fighting.]. When Karna was killed, what did he say?
Shalya, the great archer and the king of Madra, is the adornment of any assembly. It is destiny that he did everything so that Karna might be brought down. There were kings of the earth who had come to fight. O Sanjaya! On
seeing that Vaikartana had been killed, what did they say? O Sanjaya! At the time when the brave Karna, tiger
among rathas and bull among men, was killed, who were the leaders of the main divisions of the army? O Sanjaya!
How did Shalya, supreme among rathas and king of Madra, come to be engaged as Vaikartana's charioteer. Tell me
about that. In the battle, who protected the right wheel of the son of the suta? Who protected the left wheel? Who
protected the brave one from the rear? Which were the brave ones who did not abandon Karna and who were the
inferior ones who ran away? When all those on our side were united, how was maharatha Karna killed? How did
the brave ones among the Pandavas advance against the maharatha, creating a shower of arrows, like clouds showering down rain? There was a great and divine arrow, with a serpent at the mouth. O Sanjaya! How was it rendered
unsuccessful? Tell me that. O Sanjaya! When the best of soldiers on our side have been killed, I do not see any
refuge for the dispirited ones who are left. Those two brave and great archers were supreme among those on the
Kuru side. On hearing of the death of Bhishma and Drona, what is the point of my remaining alive? I cannot tolerate the thought of Radheya, the ornament of a battle, being slain. The strength of his arms was equal to that of ten
thousand elephants. O Sanjaya! When Drona was killed, tell me everything that took place between those brave
ones among men, between the Kouravas and the enemy and how the Kounteyas prepared themselves for fighting
with Karna. In the battle, how was the one without decay killed by his foes and how did he find peace?" '
