Yudhishthira asked, "Learning, austerities and donations-which among these is superior? O best among virtuous ones! I am asking you. O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Maitreya
and Krishna Dvaipayana. O king! Once, Krishna Dvaipayana was wandering around in disguise. He arrived in
Varanasi and came to Maitreya, who was from an independent lineage[Clearly a lineage of sages outside the normal mainstream.]. That supreme sage was seated. However,
seeing that he had arrived, Maitreya worshipped him and fed him excellent food. That excellent food possessed all
the  qualities  and  he  ate  it.  The  great-minded  Krishna  was  seated.  He  smiled  happily.  On  seeing  him  smile,
Maitreya spoke to Krishna. 'O one with dharma in your soul! Tell me the reason why you are smiling. You are an
ascetic. You are firm in your intelligence. And yet, you are overcome by delight. O learned one! I am bowing down
my head before you and am asking you. I have myself earned fortune through my austerities. Indeed, I have obtained great fortune. O father[The word used is tata.]! Our conducts are different and the title you bear is different from the title I bear.
But that apart, I think there is little difference between us. Indeed, I think I am superior to you.'

'"Vyasa replied, 'I smiled because I remembered hyperbolic and paradoxical statements[For example, a person who gives food and drink earns the same merits as a person who undertakes one hundred
sacrifices. This is a hyperbole and is also paradoxical.]. The words of the
Vedas seem to be false. However, why should the Vedas utter a falsehood? There are three modes that are said to
represent the supreme vow for a man-lack of hatred, gifts and finally, speaking the truth. These are the supreme
words of the ancient sacred texts and even now, we should act in accordance with them. Even a little bit of donations, given in this way, gives rise to great fruits. Without any malice in your heart, you have given a drink to a
person who was thirsty. Though you were thirsty, you gave a thirsty man a drink. You gave me food. O lord! You
have thus conquered great worlds, as if you have performed a great sacrifice. I am pleased with you because of
your sacred gift and because of your austerities. Your scent is auspicious. Your sight is auspicious. I think that the
wind bears this sacred fragrance because of the dutiful acts you have performed. O son! This is superior to all the
bathing  and  all  the  smearing  of  unguents.  Among  all  the  things  that  are  sacred  and  auspicious,  donations  are
supreme. Had they not been excellent, the words of the Vedas would not have praised them. There is no doubt that
gifts are the best. Learned people travel along the paths followed by those who make gifts. Those who donate grant
life. They are established in dharma. Among those who study the Vedas, those who control their senses and those
who renounce everything, those who donate are the best. O son! From this state of happiness, you will rise to another state of happiness that is even more beautiful. It is my view that a man thus moves from bliss to greater bliss.
There is no doubt that we have experienced many direct manifestations of what has been spoken about in the
Vedas. Prosperous people obtain greater riches. They donate, perform sacrifices and obtain happiness. O immensely wise one! It can be seen that unhappiness follows happiness and happiness follows unhappiness. This is natural
progression. Learned people have ordained that a man must follow three kinds of conduct-some are good, some
are wicked and some are neither good, nor wicked. I do not think there is any other kind of conduct. However,
there is a conduct that is not sinful. For example, a person who is engaged in his own tasks does neither good, nor
evil. Find delight. Find pleasure. Donate and perform sacrifices. Even those who are learned and ascetic will not be
able to surpass you.'"'
