'Kunti said, "O Keshava! Tell Arjuna this. 'When you were born, I was seated in the maternity chamber, surrounded by women from the hermitage. A voice was then heard from the sky. It was divine in form and pleasant to hear.

"O Kunti! This son of yours will be the equal of the one with a thousand eyes[Indra has one thousand eyes.]. In a battle, he will vanquish all
the assembled Kurus. With Bhimasena as his second, he will overturn the world. Your son will be the conqueror of
the earth and his fame will touch heaven. With Vasudeva as his ally, he will kill the Kurus in the field of battle. He
will regain the paternal share that had been lost. Together with his brothers, the illustrious one will perform three
horse sacrifices."' O Achyuta! If I know Bibhatsu Savyasachi, who is devoted to the truth, it must be as it was spoken. I know that he is strong and unassailable. O Dasharha! It must therefore be as the voice had spoken. O Varshneya! If there is any dharma, it must truly be that way. O Krishna! You will also bring about everything. I do not
doubt the truth of what the voice had spoken. I bow down before the great dharma. It is dharma that sustains living
beings. Speak these words to Dhananjaya.

'"Speak these words to Vrikodara, who is always ready. 'The time for which a kshatriya lady gives birth has arrived. Those who are bulls among men do not waver when an enmity surfaces.' You have always known about
Bhima's intelligence. That destroyer of enemies cannot be pacified until the enemy has been destroyed.

'"O Krishna! O Madhava! Speak these words to the fortunate and illustrious Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.], learned in all forms of
dharma and daughter-in-law of the great-souled Pandu. 'O immensely fortunate one! O one born in a noble lineage! O illustrious one! You have always behaved towards all my sons as is appropriate and as one should behave.'

'"Speak to the two sons of Madri, both of whom are devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. 'Choose the enjoyments that can be gained through valour over life itself.' O Purushottama! If a man lives according to the dharma
of kshatriyas, he is always delighted at prosperity that is gained through valour. It was while you looked on that
Panchali, who was devoted to every kind of dharma, was harshly addressed. It is not proper for you to forgive that.
The unhappiness from the loss of the kingdom, the defeat at the game of dice and the banishment of my sons was
nothing compared to the unhappiness when that large, dark and weeping lady was brought to the assembly hall and
made to listen to harsh words. In my view, that was a greater misery. The one with the beautiful thighs has always
been devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. She was following the dharma of women then[Droupadi was in her period.]. Though she has protectors, at that time, Krishna[Droupadi.] obtained no protectors there.

'"O Krishna! O mighty-armed one! Tell this to Arjuna, tiger among men, supreme among those who wield all
weapons. 'Follow the path indicated by Droupadi.' You know that when Bhima and Arjuna are enraged, they are
like two Yamas and can convey even the gods to the final destination. Both were insulted when Krishna[Droupadi.] was
brought to the assembly hall and Duhshasana addressed terrible and harsh words towards her, while all the brave
Kurus looked on. Remind him about that again. Ask about the welfare of the Pandavas and Krishna and her sons.
O Janardana! Also tell them that I am extremely well. Travel along a safe path and protect my sons."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Mighty-armed Krishna saluted and circumambulated her. Then he strode out, like a lion in
his gait. He granted leave to Bhishma and the other bulls among the Kurus[They had gone with Krishna to meet Kunti.]. He made Karna[There is no mention earlier of Karna having accompanied Krishna.] ascend his chariot and left with Satyaki. When Dasharha had left, all the Kurus assembled together and talked about the great and
extraordinary wonders that had occurred in connection with Keshava. They said, "The entire earth is confounded
and has been snared in the noose of death. It will be destroyed because of Duryodhana's stupidity." Purushottama
left the city and talked for a long time with Karna. Having given Radheya permission to leave, the delight of all the
Yadavas goaded his horses towards a great speed. Urged by Daruka, the horses seemed to drink up the sky and
dashed with the speed of the mind and the wind. Having covered a great distance like swift kites, the horses, bearing the wielder of the Sharnga bow, reached Upaplavya while the sun was still high in the sky.'
