Vaishampayana said, 'The timid one, with eyes like lotus petals, lamented in many ways. She was confused and
miserable. Afflicted, she fell down on the ground. The queen was divine in form. When she regained her senses, she saw Ulupi, the daughter of the serpent, and spoke these words. "O Ulupi! Behold. Our victorious husband
is lying down in the battle, slain. This is because of what you did to my young child. Are you not noble? Do you
not know dharma? Are you not devoted to your husband? Because of what you have done, our husband has been
killed and is lying down in the battle. Even if Dhananjaya has committed all manner of crimes towards you, I am
beseeching you now to forgive him. Give him his life back. O beautiful one! You are indeed noble. You  know
about dharma and are famous in the three worlds. Having caused your husband to be killed by your son, why are
you not grieving? O daughter of a serpent! I am not sorrowing because my son has been killed. I am grieving because of my husband and because of the hospitality that has been shown to him." The queen said this to Ulupi, the
daughter of the serpent. Having said this, the illustrious one went to where her husband was and said, "O foremost
among the Kurus! Arise. O beloved! Do what brings me pleasure. O mighty-armed one! I have set this horse free.
O brave one! You should indeed follow Dharmaraja's sacrificial horse. Why are you lying down on the ground? O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! My breath of life depends on you and so do those of the Kurus. How can someone
who grants others their breaths of life give up his own breath of life? O Ulupi! Behold this praiseworthy sight of
your husband having been slain in the battle. You incited the son to kill him and are not grieving. This child should
sleep as he wishes. Instead, he has been killed and is lying down on the ground. O one with the red eyes! O Gudakesha! O Vijaya! It would be good if you came back to life. O extremely beautiful one[In case Ulupi has been driven by jealousy.]! It is not a crime for a
man to have many wives. Women should be like me. Their intelligence shouldn't be like yours. This friendship[Marriage.]
was ordained by the creator. It is eternal and indestructible. Know that friendship and make that relationship come
true. My husband has been slain through my son now. If I do not see him alive now, I will cast aside my life. I am
miserable and timid, having been separated from my husband and my son. There is no doubt that while you look
on, I will fast to death[Praya, act of giving up one's life by fasting to death.]." Chaitravahini[Chitrangada, Chitravahana's daughter. Chitrangada was the daughter of King Chitravahana.] spoke in this way to her co-wife, the daughter of the serpent. O lord of
men! Then silent, she sat down, prepared to fast to death.'
