'Drupada said, "Among all beings, beings who sustain life through intelligence are superior. Among those that
have intelligence, men are superior; and among men, brahmanas. Among brahmanas, those who know the Vedas
are superior; and among those who know the Vedas, those who have achieved understanding. It is my view that
you are the foremost among those who have achieved understanding. You have been born in a distinguished lineage and possess age and learning. In wisdom, you are the equal of Shukra and Angirasa[Shukra is the preceptor of the demons. Though the text says Angirasa, it should be interpreted as Angirasa's son.
The sage Angirasa's son was Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods.]. You know everything
about the kind of conduct Kourava follows. You know the conduct of Kunti's son, Pandava Yudhishthira. The Pandavas were deceived by their enemies, with Dhritarashtra's knowledge. Though Vidura entreated him, he followed
his son alone. It was on Shakuni's advice that Kunti's son had been challenged earlier. He was unskilled in dice
and they were skilled in dice, but he was steadfast in the pure conduct of a kshatriya. Thus it was that Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira was deceived. Under no circumstances will they return the kingdom of their own accord. But you
should speak words full of dharma to Dhritarashtra. It is certain that you will then win the hearts of his soldiers.
Vidura will also act in accordance with your words and bring about dissension in Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. With
dissension among his advisers and reluctance among his warriors, he will then face a task in bringing them together again. Meanwhile, the intelligent Parthas will happily and single-mindedly devote their attention to military
matters and to the collection of supplies. There will be dissension among the others and you will spend a long time
there. There is no doubt that they will not be able to pay attention to military matters. I feel that this necessary task
is your main purpose in being there. After meeting with you and listening to your words, Dhritarashtra may decide
to act according to dharma. You are united with dharma and you will act in accordance with dharma. To those who
are compassionate, recount the hardships confronted by the Pandavas. To the elders, speak about the dharma that
has been observed in the lineage earlier. I have no doubt that you will be able to estrange their minds. You have
nothing to fear from them. You are a brahmana who has knowledge of the Vedas. You are being sent on a task as a
messenger. And specifically, you are old. To bring success to the objective of the Kounteyas, leave swiftly for the
Kouravyas, when there is a conjunction of Pushya and at the muhurta of Jaya[Pushya is the eighth nakshatra and is regarded as the most auspicious. The etymology of the word Pushya also
means 'nourishing'. A muhurta is a period of forty-eight minutes and there are fifteen muhurtas during the day and
fifteen muhurtas during the night. Some of these are good, while others are not. In the standard listing of these thirty muhurtas, the name 'Jaya' does not occur. Instead, some conjunctions on specific lunar days (tithis) signify
'Jaya' or victory. The best muhurta is 'Brahma', which occurs towards dawn, the specific time depending on the
time of sunrise. However, in the standard listing of muhurtas, there is a name Pushya, which is good, but not as
good as 'Brahma'. This occurs late in the evening, the specific time depending on the time of sunrise. Therefore,
the priest probably left at dawn or late in the evening.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'Having been instructed in this way by the great-souled Drupada, the priest, whose conduct was excellent, departed for the city of Nagasahrya[Nagasahrya is another name for Hastinapura.].'