Vaishampayana said, 'Dharmaraja Yudhishthira heard these words of Janardana. In Keshava's presence, the one
with dharma in his soul then spoke to his brothers. "You have heard what transpired in the assembly hall, in the assembly of the Kurus. You have also thought about everything that Keshava has said. O supreme among men!
Therefore, divide my soldiers now. Seven akshouhinis have assembled together for victory. Listen to the names of
seven generals when I recount their names-Drupada, Virata, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Satyaki, Chekitana and
the valorous Bhimasena. All these generals are warriors who are ready to lay down their lives. All of them are
learned in the Vedas and are brave. All of them possess good conduct and are devoted to their vows. All of them
are humble and know about policy. They are skilled in the art of war. They are skilled in the use of arrows and are
capable of fighting with all weapons. One who will lead all seven armies must know about army formations. He
must be able to withstand Bhishma, who is like a fire with flames as arrows, on the field of battle. O Sahadeva! O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! O tiger among men! You tell me first. Who is capable of being our general?"

'Sahadeva replied, "He has been with us in our times of unhappiness. He is a valiant king. He is conversant with
dharma and resorts to it. We resorted to him to obtain our share. Powerful Matsya Virata is skilled in the use of
weapons and is unassailable in battle. He can withstand Bhishma and those maharathas in the field of battle."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Sahadeva, eloquent in the use of words, had spoken these words, Nakula followed
with these words. "He stands out in age, learning, fortitude, birth in a noble lineage, humility and greatness of family. He is illustrious and skilled in the use of all weapons. He learnt the use of weapons from Bharadvaja[This doesn't mean Drona. Drona is actually Bhaaradvaja, Bharadvaja's son. Drupada, together with Drona, studied under Bharadvaja, the father.]. He is
unassailable and is devoted to the truth. He has always rivalled Drona and the immensely strong Bhishma. He is a
general who prides himself on being foremost in the arrays of kings. He is surrounded by sons and grandsons, like
a tree with one hundred branches. In anger, together with his wife, this lord of the earth performed terrible austerities for Drona's destruction. He is brave and adorns any assembly. That bull among kings has always supported us
like a father. Our father-in-law Drupada should be at the head of our army. He will be able to withstand both
Bhishma and Drona. That is my view. O king! This king knows about divine weapons and he is a friend of Angi-
ras[Here, Angiras means Drona. Drona was Bharadvaja's son and Bharadvaja was descended from Angiras, Angiras
was Bharadvaja's grandfather. Drona and Drupada used to be friends, before they separated.]."
'When Madri's two sons had spoken, Vasava's son Savyasachi, the descendant of the Kuru lineage, who was
like Vasava himself, spoke these words. "He arose through the power of austerities and by satisfying the rishi[The rishi in question is Yaja. The story of Dhrishtadyumna's birth has been recounted in Section 11 (Volume 1).]. He
is immensely strong and is a divine person. He is like the fire in his complexion. He bore a bow and a sword. He
was clad in armour. The spirited one was ascended on a chariot that was yoked to celestial horses. He arose from
the bed of fire. The valiant one's chariot roared like a gigantic cloud. The brave one is capable of withstanding a
lion and he is like a lion in his valour. He has the sinews of a lion. He is mighty-armed. He has the chest of a lion.
He is immensely strong. The brave one roars like a lion. He has the shoulders of a lion. He is immensely radiant.
He has excellent brows. He has excellent teeth. He has an excellent chin. He has excellent arms. He has an excellent face and he is not thin. He has excellent clavicles. He has extremely large eyes. He has excellent feet. He has
an excellent stance. Like a rutting elephant, he cannot be penetrated by any weapon. He has been born for Drona's
destruction. He is truthful and a master of his senses. I think that Dhrishtadyumna can withstand Bhishma's
weapons, which are like the lightning in their touch and are like serpents with flaming jaws. Like the fire, they descend with the force of Yama's messengers. They are like the terrible vajra in their impact and Rama[Parashurama. The story will be told in Section 60.] himself confronted them once in battle. I do not see a man who can withstand the one with the great vow[Meaning Bhishma.], with the exception
of Dhrishtadyumna. O king! That is my view. He is swift in the use of his hands. He is a colourful warrior. It is my
view that he should be our general. He is handsome and wears impenetrable armour. He is like an elephant that
leads the herd."

'Bhima said, "Shikhandi, Drupada's son, has been born to kill him[Bhishma.]. O Indra among kings! This is what the assembled Siddhas and rishis said. When he uses divine weapons in the midst of battle, men gaze at his form, as if he
is the great-souled Rama[Parashurama.]. O king! When there is a fight, I do not see anyone who can pierce Shikhandi with a
weapon in battle, when he is armoured and is astride his chariot. O king! In a duel, no one other than Shikhandi
can withstand Bhishma, who is great in his vows. I think that this brave one should be our general."

'Yudhishthira said, "O sons[The word used is tata.]! The substance and lack of substance of everything in the universe[This can also be translated, and interpreted, in a different way. The universe with substance is the present one and
the universe without substance is a universe from the past, or one in the future.] and the
strengths and weaknesses of everything, past and future, are known to Keshava, who has dharma in his soul. Whoever Dasharha Krishna names should be our general, regardless of whether he is skilled in the use of weapons or
not, regardless of whether he is aged or old. O sons[The word used is tata.]! He is the root, whether it is our victory, or our disaster. Our
lives, our kingdom, our successes, our failures, our happiness and our unhappiness are vested in him. He is the one
who has created and he is the one who has placed[Dhata and vidhata respectively.]. Our success is based on him. Whoever is named by Dasharha
Krishna should be the general of our army. Let the one who is foremost among speakers speak, because the night is
passing. Having appointed a general under Krishna's instructions, when the rest of the night has passed, we will
march out to the field of battle, anointing our weapons with fragrances[The word used is adhivasa, which can also mean consecration in general.] and performing auspicious ceremonies."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard Dharmaraja's intelligent words, Pundarikaksha glanced towards Dhananjaya and said, "O great king! It is also my opinion that the powerful and valiant warriors who have been named as
possible generals of the army are all capable and can crush the enemy. In a great war, they will generate fear in Indra, not to speak of the avaricious sons of Dhritarashtra, evil in their intelligence. O mighty-armed one! O destroyer of enemies! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! To please you, I have made great efforts to bring about peace.
We have paid off our debt to dharma and we can't be blamed by those who wish to do that. That childish son of
Dhritarashtra thinks himself to be wise and thinks that he has become successful because of his strength. He thinks
that we are weak. It is best to arrange your army. I think that they can only be persuaded through death. Dhritarashtra's sons will not be capable of standing up when they see Dhananjaya, an enraged Bhimasena, the twins who are
like Yama and the intolerant Dhrishtadyumna, seconded by Yuyudhana, Abhimanyu, Droupadi's sons, Virata, Dru-
pada, the leaders of the akshouhinis and the Indras among men who are firm in their valour. Our armies have substance. They are invincible. They are unassailable. There is no doubt that we kill the forces of Dhritarashtra's son
in battle." When Krishna had spoken in this way, those best of men were delighted in their hearts and a great roar
arose from them, "Get it yoked!" The soldiers swiftly rushed around.

'There were the sounds of horses and elephants and the roar of wheels in every direction. There was the tumultuous sound of conch shells and drums in every direction. When the Pandavas marched out with their soldiers on
every side, the unassailable army looked like the overflowing Ganga. Bhimasena and Madri's armoured sons were
at the front of the army. Subhadra's son, Droupadi's sons, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, the Prabhadrakas and the
Panchalas followed Bhimasena. The sound that arose was like the ocean at the time of the full moon. The delighted
soldiers roared as they proceeded and seemed to touch the heaven. The armed forces were happy and were capable
of penetrating the ranks of the enemy. Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, advanced in their midst. Wagons, carts for vending, brothel houses, caravans, treasure chests, war machines, armouries, physicians, doctors, the invalids in the
army and the thin and weak troops and the attendants were gathered together by the king and advanced. The truthful Panchali Droupadi remained in Upaplavya with the women, surrounded by servant maids and servants. Pandu's
sons advanced after leaving stationary and mobile troops behind to guard their base camp. They also left large defensive columns. O king! They proceeded while distributing cows and gold to the brahmanas who gathered around
and praised them, as they rode on chariots decorated with gems. The Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu, the lordly son of the
king of Kashi, Shreniman, Vasudana and the unvanquished Shikhandi were cheerful and satisfied. They were armoured and held weapons. They were adorned in ornaments. All of them surrounded and followed King Yudhishthira. Virata, Yajnasena of Somaka[Drupada.], Sudharma, Kuntibhoja, Dhrishtadyumna's sons, forty thousand chariots,
five times that number of horses, ten times that number of infantry and sixty thousand riders were at the back.
Anadhrishti, Chekitana, the king of Chedi and Satyaki-all these surrounded Vasudeva and Dhananjaya and
marched. They reached Kurukshetra, armed and arrayed in battle formations. The Pandavas seemed to be like roaring bulls. On entering Kurukshetra, those destroyers of enemies blew on their conch shells. In similar fashion, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya also sounded their conch shells. When they heard the resounding roar of Panchajanya[The name of Krishna's conch shell.],
which was like the roar of thunder, all the soldiers rejoiced. The sound of conch shells and drums mingled with the
leonine roars of those swift ones and echoed on earth, in the sky and among the oceans.

'There was a spot that was plain and pleasant, with plenty of fodder and fuel. King Yudhishthira made the army
set up camp there, avoiding cremation grounds, sanctuaries of gods, hermitages of rishis and places of pilgrimage.
This was an agreeable region, without any salinity. It was pure and auspicious. Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, the lord
of the earth, made arrangements for a camp there. When the exhausted mounts had rested, he cheerfully advanced
again, surrounded by hundreds and thousands of kings. Wandering around in every direction, Partha and Keshava
drove away hundreds of platoons from the army of Dhritarashtra's son. Parshata Dhrishtadyumna and the powerful
charioteer Yuyudhana Satyaki measured out the camp[The final camp or cantonment in Kurukshetra.]. This reached up to the sacred river Hiranvati in Kurukshetra. It was easy to cross there. The water was pure and was free from stones and mud. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Keshava had a moat dug up there. For the sake of protection, he instructed that a platoon of troops
should be posted there. In the appropriate way, Keshava also instructed that hundreds and thousands of camps
should be erected for the other lords among men, along the lines of those for the great-souled Pandavas. They had
an abundance of water and kindling there and they were unassailable. They were stocked with items of consumption, food, grain and drink. There were separate and expensive camps for those kings. O Indra among kings! They
looked like vimanas that had descended on the surface of the earth. Hundreds of wise artisans, who were paid
wages, were employed there and there were extremely skilled physicians, with every kind of requirement. King
Yudhishthira ensured that strings of bows, bows, armour, weapons, honey, clarified butter, mountainous heaps of
resin[Resin and charcoal are flammable ingredients used in war.] and sand, plenty of water and fodder, chaff and charcoal were made available to every camp. There were
giant machines used in war, iron arrows, javelins, swords, battle axes, bows and armour to be worn by the men on
their chests. There were elephants clad in armour, with spikes attached to them. They looked like mountains and
each was capable of fighting a hundred thousand warriors. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On learning that
the Pandavas had set up their camp there, their friends arrived at that spot, with their soldiers and their mounts.
They had observed brahmacharya. They had drunk soma. They had given away large quantities of dakshina. Those
lords of the earth now assembled for the victory of the sons of Pandu.'
