Yudhishthira asked, "All these men have doubts about dharma. What is dharma? Where does dharma come
from? O grandfather! Tell me this. Is dharma for objectives in this world, or is it for objectives in the world
hereafter? Or is dharma for both objectives? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "Good conduct, the sacred texts and the Vedas-these are the three signs of dharma. The wise
say that the objective is a fourth indication of dharma. On this, superior and inferior deeds have been spoken about.
The rules of dharma have been laid down for conduct in this world. They ensure happiness, both in this world and
in the next. A wicked person who engages in evil is incapable of obtaining the subtle aspects of dharma. Some say
that those who perform wicked deeds can never be freed from their sins. However, a person who speaks about sin
may act like one who follows dharma[Clearly, a distinction is being drawn between speaking of evil and acting wickedly.]. Devotion to dharma is evident in the conduct of those who resort to it, not
by speaking about it. A thief may steal riches and spend those on dharma. When there is no king, a thief may find
delight in stealing the property of others. However, when others steal what he has stolen, he then wishes for a king.
Even when his own property has been touched, he is not content with the riches that belong to him alone. Without
any fear and without any uncertainty, he knocks at the king's doors, as if he is a pure person[The reference is to a thief who goes and complains to the king about having become the victim of a theft
himself.]. A person who is
evil in conduct never thinks of himself in that way. Truthful words are virtuous and there is nothing that is superior
to the truth. Truth holds everything up. Everything is established in truth. The perpetrators of wicked and terrible
acts also separately have pledges of truth among themselves. They resort to the pledge of not acting violently towards each other. If they do not abide by these agreements, there is no doubt that they are destroyed. It is eternal
dharma that the riches of others should not be stolen. Powerful ones think that this system has been instituted by
the weak. However, when destiny makes them weak, they take pleasure in this system. Those who are extremely
powerful are not necessarily happy. Therefore, never use your intelligence to embark on a task that is not upright.
Then there is no reason for fear from wicked people, thieves, or kings. Since such a person has not done anything
against anyone else, he is free from fear and dwells in purity. A thief is frightened of everything, like a deer that
has come to a village. Having acted wickedly, he thinks that everyone's conduct is like that. A pure person is always delighted and is always fearless. Judging by his own self, he never sees any wicked conduct in others. Those
who are engaged in the welfare of beings have said that donations represent dharma. Those who have riches think
that this conduct has been laid down by those who are miserly. However, when destiny makes them poor, they find
pleasure in this principle. However, those who are extremely rich aren't necessarily happy. A man should not act
towards others in a way that he would not like to be acted against. Knowing what is not agreeable to himself, he
should not act towards others in that way. If a person becomes the lover of someone else's wife, whom will he
speak to? What does he deserve to say? Act towards others in ways that you are prepared to tolerate yourself. That
is my view. If a person wishes to remain alive himself, how can he murder another? One should think about others
on the basis of what one desires for one's own self. Extra objects of pleasure should be shared with others. That is
the reason the Creator ordained the practice of moneylending. One must remain established in the pledges that
have been made to the gods. When it is a time of gain, it is laudable to remain established in dharma. The learned
have said that dharma is what is agreeable to everyone. O Yudhishthira! Behold. I have instructed you about the
signs of dharma and adharma. This is what the Creator ordained in ancient times, for the sake of ensuring accumulation in the worlds. Virtuous people always pursue the subtle objectives of dharma and observe supreme conduct.
O supreme among the Kuru lineage! I have recounted to you the signs of dharma. Therefore, never use your intelligence to embark on a task that is not upright."'
