Vaishampayana said, 'The rishis and the Pandavas again asked Markandeya, "Is there anyone who has a longer life
than you?"

'He told them, "Yes, there is a rajarshi named Indradyumna. When his merits were exhausted, he fell down from
heaven, exclaiming, 'My deeds have been lost[As the subsequent sentences show, this means that Indradyumna no longer knows who he is.].' He came to me and asked me whether I knew him. I told him,
'We are not chemists[This is odd. The text says rasayanika, which cannot be translated as anything other than chemists or alchemists. But this doesn't make a great deal of sense. Perhaps it should read vasayanika, meaning those who have
fixed abodes. Since hermits don't have fixed abodes and are not vasayanikas, they are unlikely to recognize anyone, since they move around from one place to another.]. We pursue our goals by tormenting our bodies and minds. We do not perform acts for the
sake of wealth. There is an owl in the Himalayas by the name of Prakarakarna. He may know you.' But the Himalayas where he lives, is a long distance away from here. He became a horse and carried me to the place where
the owl was. Then the rajarshi asked it, 'Do you know me?' It reflected for some time and then said, 'No. I do not
know you.' Hearing these words, rajarshi Indradyumna again spoke to the owl. 'Is there anyone who has a longer
life than you?' The owl replied, 'There is a lake by the name of Indradyumna. A crane named Nadijangha lives
there and he is older than we are[Both Markandeya and the owl.]. Ask him.' Indradyumna then took me and the owl to the lake where the crane
named Nadijangha lived. We asked it, 'Do you know the king named Indradyumna?' It thought for a while and
replied, 'No. I do not know King Indradyumna.' We asked it, 'Is there anyone who has had a longer life than you?'

It replied, 'There is a tortoise named Akupura who lives in this lake. He is older than I am.' We replied, 'Perhaps
he knows about this king. Let us ask Akupura.' The crane then spoke to the tortoise Akupura. 'We need to ask you
something. Please be kind enough to come to us.' Hearing this, the tortoise emerged from the lake and came to
where we were standing, on the banks of the lake. When it came, we asked it, 'Do you know of this king named
Indradyumna?' It thought for some time and then its eyes were filled with tears. Its heart was agitated and it trembled. It almost lost its senses. Then it joined its limbs in salutation and said, 'How can I not know that king? In earlier times, when kindling the sacrificial fire, he erected sacrificial stakes one thousand times[That is, Indradyumna performed one thousand sacrifices.]. This lake was created from the hooves of cattle he gave away as gifts. I have lived here ever since then.' As soon as we heard these
words of the tortoise, a celestial chariot descended from the world of the gods and words were heard about Indradyumna. 'Heaven is ready for you. That is your appropriate place. Your deeds are great. Go there in a cheerful
frame of mind. The words about sacred deeds touch the heaven and the earth. As long as there is sound, so long
does man live. Whenever a being's evil deeds are recounted on earth, he descends to the inferior worlds as long as
those words are recounted. Therefore, right till the end, any man on earth should be engaged in good deeds. He
should avoid evil conduct and seek refuge in dharma.' On hearing this, the king replied, 'Wait until I have returned
these seniors to the places I brought them from.' He brought me and the owl Prakarakarna to our usual places.
Then he returned in that chariot to the place that was appropriate for him. Though I have a long life, this is what I
have witnessed." This is what Markandeya told the Pandavas.

'The Pandavas happily said, "That was proper. You did the right thing in restoring King Indradyumna to heaven
again, when he had fallen from the world of heaven." He replied, "Devaki's son Krishna also saved rajarshi Nriga,
when he had descended into hell and was in distress. He returned him again to heaven[King Nriga inadvertently donated the same cow to two brahmanas. He was cursed and became a lizard that
lived in a well. Krishna rescued him from this curse.]."'