'"Karna said, 'O Keshava! I have no doubt that you are affectionately speaking to me as a well-wisher. O Varshneya! As a friend, you wish for my welfare. I also know everything about my being Pandu's son under the norms
of dharma. O Krishna! These are the instructions of the sacred texts of dharma, as you have interpreted them. O
Janardana! As a maiden, she conceived me in her womb through the sun. Once I was born, she abandoned me on
the instructions of the sun. O Krishna! I was born in this way, Pandu's son under the norms of dharma. However,
Kunti did not think of my welfare and cast me out as one undesired. As soon as he saw me, the suta Adhiratha took
me home. O Madhusudana! Out of affection towards me, he gave me to Radha[Adhiratha's wife.]. Out of affection towards me, milk
flowed from Radha's breasts. O Madhava! She accepted my urine and my excrement. How can someone like me
ignore the ancestral oblations that are due to her? I am learned in dharma. I have always devoted myself to listening to the sacred texts of dharma. Suta Adhiratha thinks of me as a son. Out of affection towards him, I have always thought of him as a father. O Madhava! O Janardana! Out of affection towards his son, he had my birth rites
performed, in accordance with the prescriptions of the sacred texts. He got the brahmanas to name me Vasushena.
O Keshava! When I attained youth, he had me married to wives. O Janardana! I have given birth to sons and
grandsons through them. O Krishna! My heart is tied with bonds of affection to them. O Govinda! The entire earth,
masses of gold, delight and fear cannot incite me to be false towards these. O Krishna! In Dhritarashtra's lineage, I
have obtained refuge with Duryodhana. I have enjoyed a kingdom for thirteen years, without any thorns. I have offered oblations and performed many sacrifices, but in the company of sutas. I have issued invitations and undertaken matrimonial alliances, but in the company of sutas. O Krishna! O Varshneya! On obtaining me on his side,
Duryodhana has raised his weapons and is ready for war with the Pandavas. O Achyuta! Therefore, I have been
confidently chosen as the supreme warrior to counter Savyasachi in a duel with chariots. O Janardana! I cannot be
false to Dhritarashtra's intelligent son because of death, bondage, fear or greed. O Hrishikesha! If I do not fight
with Savyasachi now in a duel with chariots, that will bring ill fame to both me and Partha.

'"'O Madhusudana! There is no doubt that you have spoken with my welfare in mind. There is no doubt that all
the Pandavas will act in accordance with your instructions. O Purushottama! You should not reveal this conversation between us. O descendant of the Yadava lineage! I think that this will be in everyone's interests. If the king
who has dharma in his soul and is rigid in his vows[Yudhishthira.] knows that I am Kunti's first son, he will not accept the kingdom. O Madhusudana! O destroyer of enemies! Even if I obtain this large and prosperous kingdom, I will hand it
over to Duryodhana. Yudhishthira has dharma in his soul. He has Hrishikesha as a leader and Dhananjaya as a warrior. May he be the king forever. O Madhava! Maharatha Bhima, Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi's sons, Uttamouja,
Yudhamanyu, Satyadharma, Somaki, Chaidya, Chekitana, the unvanquished Shikhandi, the Kekaya brothers who
have the complexions of fireflies, maharatha Kuntibhoja who has the complexion of a rainbow[Literally, Indra's bow, meaning rainbow.], Bhimasena's maternal uncle, maharatha Senajit and Virata's son Shankha are on his side. The earth and the kingdom will be his. O
Janardana! You are his treasury. O Krishna! This large assemblage of kshatriyas has been brought together. This
resplendent kingdom, famous among all the kings, has already been won[By Yudhishthira.]. O Varshneya! Dhirtarashtra's son will
undertake a sacrifice with weapons. O Janardana! You will be the one who will witness this sacrifice. O Krishna!
When the sacrifice is performed, you will be the adhvaryu[There are four types of officiating priests-hotar (one who recites from the Rig Veda), udgatar (one who recites
from the Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who recites from the Yajur Veda) and brahman (one who recites from the
Atharva Veda).]. Bibhatsu, with the ape on his banner, will gird himself as the hotar. Gandiva will be the ladle. The valour of men will be the clarified butter. Unleashed by
Savyasachi, aindra, pashupata, brahma and sthunakarna[With the exception of sthunakarna, the others are divine weapons. Sthunakarna means thick-eared or thick-
shafted.] will be mantras. Matching his father in valour and even
surpassing him, Subhadra's son will be the gravastotra[Gravastotra is an invocation when the soma juice is extracted. Gravastotra is also a priest who chants this invocation. Subhadra's son is Abhimanyu.]. Yet again, the immensely strong Bhima, the tiger among
men whose roars in the field of battle destroy an army of elephants, will be the udgatar and prastota[Priest who prepares the presentations at a Sama Veda sacrifice.]. The eternal
King Yudhishthira has dharma in his soul. He knows about incantations and oblations and about the brahman. O
Madhusudana! The sound of the conchshells, drums and kettledrums, resounding like roaring lions, will be the
subrahmanya[Subrahmanya is Kartikeya's name and the reference means an invocation to Kartikeya.]. Nakula and Sahadeva, Madri's two illustrious and extremely valiant sons, will be the shamitars[Priests in charge of sacrificing animals.].
O Govinda! The chariots will have spotted flagpoles and will be stocked with spotless spears. O Janardana! These
will be the sacrificial poles at the sacrifice. Shafted arrows, hollow arrows, iron arrows, arrows with heads like the
teeth of calves and javelins will be the pots of soma. The bows will be the strainers[For straining the soma juice.]. The swords will be broken
fragments from the jars. The heads will be the sacrificial cakes. O Krishna! Blood will be the oblations offered at
this sacrifice. Maces, lances and unblemished clubs will be the kindling. The pupils of Drona and Sharadvata Kripa
will be the superintending priests[Sadasyas.]. The arrows unleashed by the wielder of the Gandiva, by maharathas and by
Drona and Drona's son, will be the ladles. Satyaki will be the pratiprasthanika[Priest who assists the adhvaryu.]. Dhritarashtra will be the performer of the sacrifice and the great army will be the wife[The performer of the sacrifice has to be accompanied by his wife.]. O mighty-armed one! When this atiratra[A sacrifice that is performed overnight.] sacrifice is
observed, the immensely strong Ghatotkacha will be the shamitar. O Krishna! Because he was born from a fire, the
powerful Dhrishtadyumna will be the dakshina at the sacrifice when oblations[The word used in the text is vaitana. This has several meanings, but oblations (usually burnt) into the fire is
most appropriate.] are offered.

'"'O Krishna! I regret the harsh words I used against the Pandavas to please Dhritarashtra's son. I am now tormented by that deed. O Krishna! When you see me killed by Savyasachi, that will be the punashchiti[Punashchiti is a type of sacrifice associated with the Yajur Veda. In this context, the term can also be interpreted
as the second part of the sacrifice.] of their sacrifice. When Pandava[Bhima.] roars loudly and drinks Duhshasana's blood, that will be the drinking of soma. O Janardana! When the two from Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi respectively.] bring down Drona and Bhishma, that will be the conclusion of the sacrifice.
O Madhava! When the immensely strong Bhimasena kills Duryodhana, that will signify the end of Dhritarashtra's
sacrifice. O Keshava! Dhritarashtra's daughters-in-law and granddaughters-in-law will gather together, their lords
killed, their sons killed, their protectors killed. O Janardana! Together with Gandhari, they will weep at the sacrificial site, frequented by dogs, vultures and ospreys. That will be like the bath after the sacrifice. O Madhusudana! O
bull among kshatriyas! These kshatriyas are aged in learning and aged in years. Because of your doings, let them
not have a fruitless death[In the natural course, without the glory of dying in battle.]. O Keshava! Let this entire circle of kshatriyas meet their death through weapons in
Kurukshetra, the most sacred spot in the three worlds. O Pundarikaksha! O Varshneya! Therefore, channel your
desires so that all the kshatriyas can ascend to heaven. O Janardana! As long as the mountains are there and as long
as the rivers flow, the eternal fame of this deed shall resound till then. The brahmanas will speak about the great
battle of Bharata[Alternatively, 'The brahmanas will speak about the battle of Mahabharata.']. O Varshneya! In gatherings, they will proclaim the glory of the kshatriyas. O Keshava! Bring
Kounteya here, to fight with me. O scorcher of enemies! Always keep this conversation between us secret.'"'
