Vaishampayana said, 'Placing King Dhritarashtra at the forefront, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira offered water[To Bhishma.].
His senses were bewildered. His eyes overflowing with tears, the lord of the earth arose from the waters of the
Ganga and fell down on the bank, like an elephant struck by a hunter. Instructed by Krishna, Bhima picked up the
one who was sinking down. Krishna, the afflicter of enemy armies, said, "Do not act in this way." O king! The
Pandavas saw that Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, was afflicted and had fallen down on the ground, sighing
repeatedly. They saw that the lord of men was distressed in his mind and was almost lifeless. At this, the Pandavas
were overwhelmed by grief again and sat down. The mighty-armed Dhritarashtra saw that the king was seated, afflicted by great grief. The immensely wise one spoke these words. "O tiger among Kurus! Arise. Do what must be
done next. O Kouravya! You have conquered the earth through the dharma of kshatriyas. O lord of men! Enjoy the
earth with your brothers and your well-wishers. O supreme among the upholders of dharma! I do not see any reason why you should grieve. O lord of the earth! It is I and Gandhari who should grieve. We have lost our sons and
our kingdom, like wealth that is obtained in a dream. I did not listen to the words, full of grave import, of the great-
souled Vidura, who desired our welfare. That is the reason I, an evil-minded person, am repenting. The one with
divine sight and dharma in his soul had told me earlier, "Your lineage will be destroyed because of Duryodhana's
crimes. O king! If you desire welfare for yourself and for your lineage, kill the evil-souled one, the wicked King
Suyodhana. Never  let  Karna  and  Shakuni  meet  him.  Restrain  them  from  their  intoxication  with  this  gambling
match. Instate King Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul. He will follow dharma and control and rule the earth. O
king! Or, if King Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, does not desire the kingdom, be the focal point for the entire kingdom
and accept it yourself. O lord of men! Look upon all creatures impartially. O extender of your kin! Let all your relatives earn a living." O Kounteya! The far-sighted Vidura spoke to me in this way. But my intelligence was foolish
and I followed the wicked Duryodhana. I did not listen to the brave one's sweet words. Hence, I have obtained the
fruits of this great grief and am immersed in this ocean of sorrow. O king! Behold. Your aged fathers[This probably means father and mother, that is, Dhritarashtra and Gandhari.] are miserable. O lord of men! However, I do not see any reason why you should be grieving.'
