Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Arjuna's words, the intolerant and energetic Bhimasena resorted to his patience
and spoke to his eldest brother. "O king! You know about dharma. There is nothing on earth that is not known to
you. We always wish to learn from your conduct, but are unable to do so. In my mind, I kept saying, 'I will not
speak. I will not speak.' O lord of men! However, I am speaking out of great grief. Listen. Because of your confusion, everything is now uncertain. We have become perplexed and weak. This is the king of the world. He is accomplished in all the sacred texts. How can he be overcome by confusion and cheerlessness now, like an inferior
man? You know about the coming and going of the world. O lord! There is nothing that has happened, or will happen, that is not known to you. O great king! O lord of men! This being the case, I will advance an argument about
you ruling the kingdom. Listen with undivided attention. There are two kinds of diseases, physical and mental.
Each one is generated from the other and they are not seen to exist independently. There is no doubt that a physical
disease causes a mental one. It is also certain that a mental disease results in a physical one. Someone who sorrows
over a physical or mental grief that has already occurred imposes a sorrow on a sorrow and doubles it. The three
qualities of a body are cold, heat and wind[Meaning, phlegm, bile and wind.]. When there is harmony between these qualities, that is said to be a
sign of health. If one predominates over the others, remedies have been prescribed. Cold is checked through heat
and heat is checked through cold. There are three qualities in the mind-sattva, rajas and tamas. Sorrow is
checked through joy and joy is checked through sorrow. Some are in a present state of happiness and remember
past sorrows. Others are in a present state of sorrow and remember past unhappiness. But you were not sorrowful
in the midst of woes, nor joyful in the midst of happiness. Nor should you remember sorrow in the midst of happiness, or happiness in the midst of sorrows. O Kouravya! Destiny is most powerful. O king! Or, perhaps it is your
nature that is afflicting you. In her season, Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was in a single garment and was brought into the assembly
hall, while the sons of Pandu looked on. Having seen it, why don't you remember that? We were exiled from our
residence in the city in deerskins and took up abode in the great forest. Should you not remember that? Jatasura afflicted us, there was a battle with Chitrasena and Saindhava afflicted us[Incidents respectively described in Sections 34, 35 and 42 (Volume 3).]. How is it that you have forgotten that?
Then again, while we lived in concealment, Kichaka kicked the noble lady with his foot[The noble lady is Droupadi and this is a reference to the incidents of
Section 46 (Volume 4).]. O scorcher of enemies!
You fought a battle with Drona and Bhishma. But you now have to fight this terrible battle in your mind. Arrows
will serve no purpose here, nor friends or relatives. In this battle that has presented itself, you will have to fight internally. If you are defeated in this battle and give up your life, you will take up another body and have to fight
again. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Therefore, you should fight this battle now. O great king! If you win in
this, you will become successful. Having determined the nature of beings coming and going[Birth and death.], make up your
mind. Follow the conduct of your father and grandfathers and rule the kingdom, as is appropriate. It is fortunate
that the wicked Duryodhana and his followers were killed in the battle. It is fortunate that you have followed the
course of Droupadi's hair[Droupadi had resolved not to braid her hair until the Kouravas had been
killed.]. Perform a horse sacrifice in the proper way and give away donations. O Partha! We
are your servants and so is the valiant Vasudeva."'
