Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! O one who has the valour of truth in battle! I wish
to hear everything about lord Krishna, who is without decay. He has performed extremely great and energetic
deeds in ancient times. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Accurately tell me everything about them. Why did Hari
assume the form of an inferior species? What tasks did he accomplish? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "Earlier, I went out on a hunt and went to Markandeya's hermitage. There I saw many hermits
seated, in their thousands. They honoured me by offering me madhuparka[A respectful offering made to guests or bridegrooms, consisting of honey and curd.]. Accepting that, I worshipped and honoured the rishis back in return. What I will recount was stated by maharshi Kashyapa there. It is divine and delights the mind. Listen attentively. In ancient times, the foremost danavas were full of anger and avarice. There
were also hundreds of giant asuras, intoxicated by their strength, Naraka and the others. There were many other
danavas too, invincible in battle. They could not tolerate the supreme prosperity of the gods. The gods and devarshis were oppressed by the danavas. O king! They could not find any peace and fled in different directions. The
residents of heaven saw that the earth was in a miserable state. It was full of danavas who were terrible in form and
were extremely strong. Afflicted by the load of that burden, it was miserable and submerged[Dragged down into the nether regions.]. The Adityas were
terrified. They  went  to  Brahma  and  said,  'O  Brahma!  How  will  we  continue  to  bear  the  depredations  of  the
danavas?' Svayambhu replied, 'I have already ordained what needs to be done. They are powerful and intoxicated
because of boons. Those stupid ones do not know that Vishnu, whose form cannot be seen, has assumed the form
of a boar[Vishnu in his boar (varaha) incarnation.]. That god cannot be assailed, even by all the immortals together. He will swiftly go to the spot where
those worst among danavas are. Thousands of those terrible ones reside inside the bowels of the earth. He will
pacify them all.' Hearing this, the supreme ones among the gods were delighted. The immensely energetic Vishnu
assumed the form of a boar. He penetrated the nether regions and advanced against Diti's offspring. On seeing that
superhuman being, all the daityas united. Goaded by destiny, all of them advanced violently and encircled him.
From every direction, they rushed against the boar and seized it. From every direction, they angrily tugged at the
boar. The Indras among the danavas were gigantic in form. They were immensely valorous and full of strength. O
lord! But they were not able to do anything at all. Those Indras among the danavas were then terrified and overcome by fear. Though there were thousands of them, they were full of doubt in their minds. The god of the gods is
the soul of yoga and the charioteer of yoga. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The illustrious one resorted to
yoga. He  emitted a mighty roar  and  agitated  those  daityas  and  danavas.  The  worlds  and  all  the  ten  directions
seemed to resound with these roars. At the sounds of those roars, all the worlds were agitated. The directions, and
all the gods, with Shakra[Indra.] at the forefront, were frightened. The entire universe was severely afflicted and became
immobile. Mobile and immobile objects were confused by that roar. All the danavas were terrified by that noise.
They lost their lives and fell down, confused by Vishnu's energy. Those who hated the thirty gods sought refuge in
rasatala[Nether region. There are seven nether regions-atala, vitala, sutala, rasatala, talatala, mahatala and patala.]. But the boar tore into them with his hooves and mangled their flesh, fat and bones. Because of that
great roar, he came to be known as Sanatana[This is contrived. Sanatana means eternal. Nadana means sound and Sanadana would mean someone with a
sound.]. He is Padmanabha[With a lotus in the navel.], the great yogi, the preceptor of all beings and
the king of all beings. All the large number of gods went to the grandfather and asked, 'O lord! O god! Who is
roaring like this? We cannot understand this. Who is this? Whom does this roar belong to? It has paralysed the universe.' At that time, Vishnu was in his form of a boar and the maharshis praised the great god. The grandfather
replied, 'He has slain the lords among the danavas. He is great in his form and great in his strength. This god is the
great yogi. He is the soul of all beings and the creator of all beings. He is the yogi who is the lord of all beings. He
is the womb. He is the atman. Be steady. He is Krishna, the destroyer of all sins. He is the immensely radiant one
and has accomplished a task that others would have found impossible to undertake. He has now returned to his
own atman. He is immensely fortunate and immensely radiant. He is Padmanabha, the great yogi. He is the soul of
all beings and the creator of all beings. O supreme among the gods! You should not be tormented. Nor should you
be frightened, or grieve. He is the one who ordains. He is the creator. He is time, the destroyer of everything. He is
the one who holds up the worlds. He is the great-souled one who emitted the roar. He is the immensely fortunate
one, revered by the worlds. He is Achyuta Pundarikaksha[Respectively, the one without decay and the lotus-eyed one.], the origin of all beings.""