Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! Learned men in this world praise truthfulness, forgiveness, self-control
and wisdom. What is your view?"

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a conversation between
the Sadhyas and a swan. Once upon a time, the eternal Prajapati assumed the form of a golden swan. In this form,
he travelled through the three worlds and came upon the Sadhyas.

'"The Sadhyas said, 'O bird! We are the gods who are known as the Sadhyas. You are the one who truly knows
about moksha and we wish to ask you about the dharma of moksha. We have heard that you are learned, patient
and eloquent. O bird! Virtuous words are heard from you. O bird! What do you think is the best? O great-souled
one! Where does the mind find delight? O supreme among birds! It should be your task to instruct us. O Indra
among birds! What do you think is the best among deeds, so that one can be swiftly emancipated?'

'"The swan replied, 'O ones who have fed on amrita! I have heard that one must resort to these tasks-austerities, self-control, truthfulness and the protection of the atman. All the strands of the heart must be loosened and the
pleasant and the unpleasant must be brought under one's control. One must not hurt others and be harsh in speech.
One must not receive anything good from those who are inferior. One must not excite others through speech. One
must not speak words that make them go to wicked worlds. Spoken words descend like arrows. Struck by those,
one grieves day and night. A learned person will not make these descend towards the vitals of others. He will not
release these at other people. If one is severely struck with arrows of extreme words released by others, it is one's
task to pacify them. If a person replies angrily, all his good merits from the hereafter are taken away. A person
should control his blazing anger, pacify his pride and counter the futile humiliation. He should be cheerful and free
from malice. He then takes away the good merits that the evil-minded person has earned in the hereafter. I do not
speak anything when I am censured. Even when I am incessantly assailed, I ignore it. Noble ones say that forgiveness, truthfulness, uprightness and non-violence are the best. Truth is the foundation of the Vedas. Self-control is
the foundation of truth. Emancipation is the foundation of self-control. These are all the various instructions. I
think that a person who can control the force of words, the force of anger in the mind, the force of knowledge[Presumably, false knowledge.],
the forces of the stomach and the genitals and all the other forces that consume and destroy, is a brahmana and a
sage. Lack of anger is superior to anger. Patience is superior to the lack of patience. A human is superior to those
who are not human. In that way, knowledge is superior to ignorance. One who is not enraged is superior to one
who is angered. One must be patient when one is raged against. In that event, the assailant is burnt[Through remorse.] and one obtains all his good merits. In such a case, if a person does not say anything, harsh or pleasant, in reply, if when
struck, a person is patient and does not strike back, if when assailed, he does not desire anything wicked in retaliation, such a person is always desired by the gods. A wicked person must be forgiven, as if he is equal to a superior
person, even if one has been dishonoured, assailed and censured. That is the way to obtain success. I no longer
possess any thirst. Nor is there any rage in me. In private, I always serve noble ones. I do not desire anything that
belongs to others and I do not seek any of their possessions. When I am cursed, I do not curse back. I know that
this is the door towards immortality. I am telling you the secret about the brahman. There is nothing superior for
men. They will then be freed from sin, like the moon from the clouds. Such a patient person will obtain success
through his patience and be radiant while he waits for the right time to come[The right time for death.]. He deserves to be worshipped by
everyone and is like a pillar that holds everything up. Words of great praise are spoken about him. Such a person
has control over his atman and goes to the gods. Revilers who are full of anger do not wish to speak about his lack
of qualities, because there is nothing like that. His words and mind have been protected and controlled in the appropriate way. Through the Vedas, austerities and renunciation, he has obtained everything. Such a learned person
does not react to the censure and disrespect shown by ignorant people. Nor does he cause injury to his own self by
extolling others[Extolling those who praise him. He is beyond both praise and censure.]. Like one who is content with amrita, he ignores this. Such a person is a brahmana. He sleeps
happily and disrespect does not destroy him. If there is rage when sacrifices are performed, gifts given, austerities
performed or oblations offered, Vaivasvata[Yama.] takes all these away. The efforts of a person who is enraged are futile. O supreme among the immortals! If a person protects the four gates-the genitals, the stomach, the hands and
speech  as  the  fourth-well,  he  knows  about  dharma.  Truthfulness,  self-control,  modesty,  uprightness,  non-violence, fortitude, patience, renunciation, constant studying, lack of desire towards the possessions of others-if a
person has the good conduct to practise these single-mindedly, he will rise upwards. Like a calf sucking at the four
udders of the cow, these are all the things that one should follow. There is nothing that is purer than the truth. I
have seen men and have travelled around among gods. Truth is the ladder to heaven, like a boat on an ocean. One
becomes like the people one dwells and associates with. Whoever a person advances towards, he becomes like
that. If one associates with the virtuous, one becomes virtuous. The same is the case with ascetics or thieves. This
is like a garment being dyed with the colour it has been immersed in. In that way, one comes under their subjugation. The gods always converse with the virtuous. They are not seen to be interested in human objects. A person
should know that material objects come and go, like the moon and the wind[The moon waxes and wanes and the wind comes and goes.]. If the being inside the heart has not
been stained and walks along the path of the righteous, the gods are pleased with him. From a distance, the gods
avoid those who are always addicted to their penis and stomach, men who are thieves and always harsh in speech,
even if one knows that they have tried to atone for those sins. The gods are not satisfied with those who are inferior
in spirit, those who eat everything and those who are the perpetrators of wicked deeds. They honour men who are
truthful in their vows, grateful and devoted to dharma. It is said that silence is superior to speech. The second
course is that of speaking the truth. The third course is to speak words of dharma. The fourth course is of speaking
pleasant words[This is a hierarchy, in terms of desirability, of different kinds of speech.].'
'"The Sadhyas asked, 'What is the world covered by? Why does it not shine? Why are friends cast away? What
are the reasons for not reaching heaven?'

'"The swan replied, 'The world is enveloped in ignorance. Malice leads to a lack of shining. Friends are abandoned because of greed. Because of attachment, one does not go to heaven.'

'"The Sadhyas asked, 'Among the brahmanas, who is the single one who is always happy? Who is the single
one who is silent amidst the many? Who is the single one, who though weak, is strong? Who is the single one who
does not quarrel?'

'"The swan replied, 'Among the brahmanas, the wise one is the single one who is always delighted. The wise
one is the single one who is silent amidst many. The wise one is the single one who is strong, though weak. The
wise one is the one who does not quarrel.'

'"The Sadhyas asked, 'What is divinity among brahmanas? What is said to be their virtue? What is wicked
among them? What is held to constitute their humanity?'

'"The swan replied, 'Studying represents their divinity. Vows are said to be their virtue. Censuring others is their
wickedness. Mortality constitutes their humanity.'"

'Bhishma said, "I have recounted the excellent conversation concerning the Sadhyas. The body is the womb for
deeds and a virtuous existence is said to be the truth."'
