'Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! You have talked about the best kind of intelligence, understanding what has happened and what will happen, and about the destruction that procrastination brings. O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! I wish to hear about supreme intelligence for a king, who is confounded because he is surrounded by enemies. You are accomplished in dharma and artha. You are wise. You are skilled in all
the sacred texts. O best among the Kuru lineage! I am asking you this. You should explain it to me. What should a
king who is encompassed by many enemies do? In accordance with the rules, I wish to hear everything about this.
When a king confronts a disaster in the midst of an enemy, there will be many who will range against one and seek
to injure him, because of what they have suffered earlier. There will be immensely strong ones acting against him
and he will be alone, without allies. How will he be able to take a stand? O bull among the Bharata lineage! How
will he know the difference between a friend and an enemy? How will he act against those who are neither friend,
nor foe? How will he use his wisdom to discern signs that an enemy has become a friend? How will such a man act
and how will he obtain happiness? Who should he fight with? With whom should he try for a pact? What should be
the conduct of a weak person who is in the midst of the enemy? O scorcher of enemies! This is supreme among all
the tasks that must be undertaken. Rare is the person who can speak about such things, with the exception of Shantanu's son, Bhishma, who has conquered his senses and does not waver from the truth. A listener is also extremely
difficult to get. O mighty-armed one! Therefore, you should tell me everything about all this."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! This question is worthy of someone who possesses your qualities. O son! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen completely to the secrets about a time of adversity. By employing the capabilities of different people in different tasks, an enemy can become a friend and a friend may find himself to be
censured. There is always a change in objectives. One must know about the time and the place, determine what
should be done and what should not be done, and then decide whom to trust and whom to fight. A wise person always seeks to have peace with those who wish him well. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But, for the sake of
protecting one's life, there can be an alliance with the enemy. A man who is always against alliances is not learned.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He does not obtain the objectives, or the fruits. If a person uses his reasoning
to look towards the objectives and has an alliance with an enemy or counters a friend, he obtains extremely great
fruits. On this, an ancient history is recounted, about a conversation between a cat and a rat in a banyan tree.

'"In a great forest, there was an extremely large banyan tree. It was covered with nets of creepers and was frequented by large numbers of diverse birds. Its trunks were like clouds and it offered cool and pleasant shade. Many
predatory animals lived there, with enmity towards each other. There was a hole with one hundred mouths at the
root of the tree and an immensely wise rat named Palita lived there. Earlier, a cat named Lomasha had happily
dwelt in the branches, destroying the lives of the birds. Every day, when the sun had gone down, a chandala arrived there, having turned his mind towards enmity. He would spread out nets made of sinews there. Having done
this, he would return cheerfully to his home and sleep, waiting for night to be over and for it to be morning. Every
night, a large number of animals were always killed there. On one occasion, the cat was careless and got trapped
there. At that time, the immensely wise Palita got to know that the enemy, who was always trying to kill it, had got
trapped. It wandered around, without any fear at all. As it roamed around in that forest, assured in its roaming, it
looked for some food and saw the meat[The meat left by the chandala as bait.]. It climbed up there and began to devour the meat. It laughed mentally,
as it stood above the enemy who had got trapped. While it was engaged with the meat, it happened to look up and
saw that another enemy had arrived, terrible in appearance. It used to lie down in a giant hole and was like Sharaprasuna[Someone born in reeds, Kartikeya.]. This was an agile mongoose named Harika and its eyes were coppery red. Having smelt the rat, it had
swiftly arrived there. It stood on the ground and raised its face upwards, licking its lips at the prospect of a meal.
It[The rat.] saw another enemy on a branch, one that lived in a hole in the trunk. This was an owl named Chandraka. Its
beak was sharp and it roamed around during the night. It was within the reach of both the mongoose and the owl.

'"In that situation, confronted with that great danger, it began to think. 'Death has presented itself and this is a
catastrophe and a great difficulty. There is danger from every side. What should I do to ensure my welfare? I am
obstructed in every direction and every direction seems to be the same. Tormented by this fear, I will obtain the ultimate end. There are many difficulties and there is one chance in one hundred of my remaining alive. There is no
doubt that disaster confronts me from every direction. If I descend on the ground, the mongoose will violently
seize me. If I remain here, the owl will get me, or the cat, after it has severed the noose. However, a person who is
wise should not be confused. As long as I breathe, I must try to remain alive. Those who are intelligent and wise
and are accomplished in the sacred texts of good policy, are not scared when they face a danger or a great destruction of prosperity. At the moment, I do not see any means of attaining the objective other than the cat. That animal
confronts a disaster and I can do him great service. How else can I remain alive now? There are three enemies who
are after me. Therefore, I must resort to my enemy, the cat. I will use the knowledge of kshatriyas[Probably meaning force.] and try to ensure its welfare. I have already made up my mind about how I am going to deceive these enemies. The worst of my
enemies now faces this worst of hardships. If it is possible, perhaps this fool can be made to understand where his
best interests lie. Given this difficulty, perhaps it may be made to have an alliance with me. If one is beset by enemies and if one wishes to save one's life in the midst of a hardship, the preceptors have said that one must have an
alliance with a stronger person. A learned enemy is superior to a stupid friend. The prospect of my remaining alive
is based on my enemy, the cat. Let me explain to it the means whereby it can save itself. Perhaps this enemy of
mine is intelligent.' The rat knew about the time for fighting and the time for an alliance. It knew about artha and
objectives.

'"It spoke these conciliatory words to the cat. 'O cat! Are you still alive? I am speaking these fraternal words to
you. I wish that you should remain alive. That is best for both of us. O amiable one! You will remain alive, as you
used to do earlier. I will save you and even give up my life for your sake. A way to save ourselves completely has
presented itself before me. Through that, I am capable of saving you and also ensuring the best for me. Use your
intelligence to reflect about the means I will suggest. This is good for you, good for me, and best for both of us.
The mongoose and the owl are wicked in their intelligence. O cat! As long as they do not attack me, I am fine. But
the shrieking one[The mongoose.] and the owl with the darting eyes are both glancing towards me. As I am clinging to the branch
of this tree, I am becoming extremely anxious. If one treads seven steps together, virtuous people become friends.
You are learned. We have lived together. I will act so that you have no fear from death. O cat! Without me, you are
incapable of severing this noose. If you do not injure me, I will sever this noose. You live at the top of the tree and
I dwell at the root. Both of us have lived in this tree for a long time. All this is known to you. Someone who does
not trust anyone and someone who trusts a person who should not be trusted-the learned say that these two are
always anxious in their minds and should not be praised. Let the friendship between us increase and let this be an
agreement between two virtuous ones. The learned do not praise something that is done after the time for it is over.
Know that this is full of purpose and reason and this is the right time for it. I desire that you should remain alive.
You desire that I should remain alive. If someone wishes to cross a deep and great river with a piece of wood, the
wood takes him across, and he takes the wood across too. If we act together in this way, our safety will be certain. I
will save you and you will save me.' Palita spoke these words, which were full of purpose and beneficial for both
of them. Having said this, it was impatient because time was being lost and looked on, hoping that the reasoning
would be accepted. Having heard these excellent words, the cat, the learned enemy, replied in words that were full
of reasoning and purpose and deserved to be accepted. It was intelligent and could speak well. Looking towards its
own situation, it honoured the rat back in conciliatory words and applauded its speech. Its teeth and claws were
sharp and its eyes were like lapis lazuli. Lomasha, the cat, gently looked towards the rat and said, 'O amiable one!
O fortunate one! I am delighted that you desire I should remain alive. If you know what is desirable, do it without
any reflection. I am gravely afflicted, but you are in a situation that is direr still. Since both of us face difficulties,
let us have an alliance. There is no need to think. The time has come. Let us act so that we can ensure our success.
If you free me from this difficulty, I will not forget what you have done. I have cast aside my pride and have become devoted to you. I am like a disciple and will work for your welfare. I will follow your instructions. I have
sought refuge with you.' When the cat said this and offered to be controlled, Palita again spoke some words that
were beneficial and provided arguments and counter-arguments about policy. 'The generous words that you have
spoken are not unusual for someone in your situation. You know my ways. Listen to my words, which are for your
benefit. The mongoose is giving me great fear and I will crouch under your body. Save me and do not kill me. I am
capable of saving you. Also save me from the owl. That inferior one is also seeking to get at me. O friend! I will
sever your noose. I am swearing this truthfully.' As Palita came close, Lomasha heard these words, which were
full of reason and purpose, and glancing towards it, cheerfully welcomed it with honour.

'"Having thus honoured Palita, the cat, tied to it by a bond of friendship, thought about it patiently. Happily and
quickly, it said, 'O fortunate one! Come swiftly. You are a friend whom I love like my own life. O wise one!
Through your favours, I will quickly get my life back. I will do whatever I can for you. Make it known to me. I
will do whatever you order me to. O friend! We must have an alliance. Once I have been freed from this danger,
with my large number of friends and relatives, I will do all the deeds that are for your benefit and bring you pleasure. O amiable one! Once I have been freed from this hardship, I will become yours. I will do whatever brings
you pleasure. I am capable of paying you back.' Having persuaded the cat that this was in its own interests, the rat
was reassured that the objective could indeed be achieved and entered. Having been reassured by the intelligent
cat, the rat fearlessly crouched under the cat's chest, as if it was in the lap of a father or a mother. The rat was
curled up under the cat's body. On seeing this, the mongoose and the owl lost all hope and returned to their homes.
Palita, knowledgeable about time and place, was curled up there.

'"O king! Waiting for the right time, it slowly began to gnaw through the noose. Afflicted because it was tied up
in those bonds, the cat glanced towards the rat. It asked it to sever the noose faster and faster. Palita was severing
the noose slowly. The cat continued to urge the rat on. 'O amiable one! Why are you not doing it faster? Do you
not wish to accomplish the objective? O destroyer of enemies! Sever the noose before the shvapacha[One who is an outcaste. Literally, one who eats dogs, or eats with dogs.] arrives
here.' Having been thus urged to speed up, the intelligent Palita, accomplished in wisdom, spoke these beneficial
words to the cat which was under its control. 'O amiable one! Be quiet. There is no need to speed up for you, or to
be frightened. We know about time and one should not laugh at time. If a task is started, or completed, at the
wrong time, it does not accomplish the objective. If a task is started at the right time, it accomplishes great objectives. If you are freed at the wrong time, you will become a great danger to me. O friend! Therefore, we must wait
for the right time. Why do you wish to rush? When I see the chandala coming, with a weapon in his hand, I will
sever the noose then, since both of us will suffer from fear. At that time, you will be freed and will climb up the
tree. There will be nothing except a desire to save your life then. O Lomasha! When you are trying to save yourself
and are frightened and terrified, climbing up to your branch, I will enter my hole.' Desiring its own welfare, the rat
spoke these words to the cat. However, Lomasha was immensely eloquent and knew about the use of words. It desired its own life. Having itself acted swiftly and well, it spoke these words to the rat, which was not hurrying up.

'This is not the way virtuous and affectionate people accomplish the tasks of their friends. When you faced a hardship, you were quickly freed by me. In that way, you should also swiftly do the task that ensures my welfare. O immensely wise one! Make efforts so that both of us are safe. Is it the case that you are remembering my earlier period of enmity towards you? Behold. That has indeed been a wicked act on my part. It is evident that it has led to a
reduction in my lifespan. Earlier, in my ignorance, I may have acted in unpleasant ways towards you. You should
not harbour that in your mind. I seek your forgiveness. Show me your favours.' The rat was wise and was honoured because it was knowledgeable about the sacred texts. It spoke these excellent words to the cat. 'O cat! I have
heard the words that you have spoken to protect your own interests. You should also know about the preservation
of my interests. If there is a friendship that results from fear, or if there is a friendship that is full of fear, then one
must make great efforts to preserve it. It is like placing one's hand near a snake's mouth. If a person has an agreement with a stronger person and does not protect himself, he will find it causes him injury, like eating something
that is unwholesome. There is no one who is truly an enemy. There is no one who is truly a well-wisher. Interests
are bound to interests, like an elephant to a wild elephant[Tame elephants are used to trap wild elephants.]. When a task has been completed, no one looks to see
who did it. That is the reason all tasks should be left with a little bit still undone. At that time[When the hunter arrives.], your task will be
determined by fear. You will be focused on running away and won't be able to seize me. Most of the strands have
been severed. There is only one that is still left. O Lomasha! Restrain yourself. I will swiftly sever this.' They conversed in this way, both overcome by fear.

'"When the night was over, Lomasha was overcome by terror. It became morning and the chandala named
Parigha could be seen, with a weapon in his hand. He was malformed and dark brown. His hips were broad. His
head was shaven. He was rough and was surrounded by a circle of dogs. His ears were pointed and his mouth was
large. He was aged and terrible in appearance. On seeing him, who looked like one of Yama's messengers, the cat
was terrified out of its wits. Frightened, it addressed Palita. 'What will you do now?' On seeing that terrible person, the mongoose and the owl were instantly scared and were filled with hopelessness. The two intelligent and
strong ones had contracted an agreement and because of that good policy, could no longer be struck with force[This refers to the agreement between the rat and the cat. There is an inconsistency, because
the mongoose and the owl had already left and had gone home.].
They saw that the cat and the rat had concluded an agreement for the sake of accomplishing their objectives.
Therefore, the owl and the mongoose swiftly returned to their own homes. The rat severed the cat's strand. As
soon as it had been freed, the cat rushed up the tree. Not only was its terrible enemy freed, Palita was also freed
from its fear and entered its hole. Lomasha went up the tree. The chandala looked in every direction and gathered
up his snare. O bull among the Bharata lineage! His hopes having been destroyed, in a short instant, the chandala
left the spot and returned to his own home.

'"Lomasha was freed from the fear and obtained life, something that is very difficult to obtain. From the top of
the tree, it spoke to Palita, in the hole. 'Without having had a conversation with me, you suddenly ran away. I am
grateful because you did something good for me. I hope you do not suspect me. You inspired trust in me and you
gave me my life. When it is time to enjoy yourself with a friend, why are you avoiding me? If an evil-minded person has an agreement with a friend and does not follow it up later, then, when he faces difficulties, he will not find
a friend. O friend! You made me a friend because of my capacity. Having made me a friend, you should now enjoy
that friendship. All my friends and all my relatives will show you honour, like a disciple towards a beloved preceptor. I will also worship you, with my large number of friends and relatives. Why will a grateful person not honour
someone who has given him life? You are the lord of my body and my home. All the riches that I possess are at
your command. O wise one! Be my adviser. Instruct me, like a father. I swear on my life that you need have no
fear of me. We may possess strength, but you are like Ushanas[Shukracharya.] himself in your intelligence. If your counsel is
united with that strength, victory will be assured.'

'"Having been addressed in these conciliatory words by the cat, the rat, who knew about supreme objectives,
wished to ensure its own welfare and spoke these gentle words. 'O Lomasha! I have heard everything that you
have said. Now listen to the way I see it. Friends must be examined. Enemies must also be examined. In this
world, this is seen in extremely subtle ways and is revered as wisdom. There are well-wishers in the form of enemies. There are enemies in the form of friends. Those who have been won through conciliation do not comprehend
this, because they are subservient to affection and greed. No one is born as an enemy. No one is born as a friend.
Because of their different capacities, they become friends and enemies. If it is seen that there is a selfish objective
of someone being alive because another person is alive, then that other person is a friend, but only as long as there
is no other catastrophe. There is no friendship that is permanent. There is no enmity that is permanent. Friendship
and enmity result from a specific objective. In the course of time, a friend may become an enemy. An enemy may
also become a friend. Self-interest is the most important. If a person does not know about the objective and trusts
friends and never trusts enemies, his life becomes unstable. If a person does not know about the objective and turns
his mind towards good conduct, regardless of whether it is a friend or an enemy, his intelligence is unstable. One
should not trust someone who should not be trusted. One should not even trust someone who should be trusted.
The dangers that arise from trust sever the roots. Relationships like father, mother, son, maternal uncle, nephew,
matrimonial allies, relatives-all these are based on a purpose. A mother and a father abandon a beloved son who
has fallen[Fallen in the sense of having done something reprehensible.]. People protect their own selves. Behold the essence of selfishness. I think that you are deceitful in
your wisdom. Immediately after being freed, you seek to ensure the happiness and safety of someone you should
hunt. You descended from the banyan tree to this spot. Earlier, because of your fickleness, you did not realize that
there was a snare here. Someone who is fickle cannot do something for his own self, forget others. There is no
doubt that a fickle person destroys all tasks. You have spoken pleasant words and have said that I am loved by you.
All of that is false. Listen in detail to the reasons. One becomes a beloved because of some reason. Enmity is also
because of a reason. In this world of the living, everything is for a purpose. There is no one who is always loved by
another. Friendship between two brothers born from the same womb, the affection of a husband and wife towards
each other-I know of no affection in this world that is without a reason. If a brother or a wife is enraged, after the
immediate reason is over, they naturally become affectionate again[Because of the natural bond of affection.]. However, other people do not turn affectionate in this way. Some become beloved because of gifts. Others become beloved because of words, and still others
because of mantras and offerings. People are loved to accomplish some task. Affection results from a reason.
When the reason is absent, it is no longer there. When the reason ceases to exist, the affection also withdraws itself. What reason can I think of, so that I might be your beloved? We should know that there is no connection beyond my being your food. Time changes the reason and self-interest is followed. I am wise. I know about self-interest and accept that people follow it. You should not speak such words to someone who is learned and knows
about self-interest. This is the wrong time. There is no longer a catastrophe. You must therefore have reasons of
self-interest. I am driven by self-interest and know that war and peace are both fickle. From one moment to another, they change their forms, like clouds. You were my enemy. Later, you became my friend. You have again become my enemy. Behold the fickleness of objective. As long as there was a reason, there was friendship. The reason has now gone and we have gone back to earlier times. With the progress of time, the reason has also gone. You
are my ultimate enemy and circumstances made you my friend. With that task having been accomplished, we have
returned to our natural enmity. I know the truth about what the sacred texts have laid down. How can I then enter
the snare that you have set for me? I have been freed through your valour and you have been freed through my valour. We have favoured each other through our conducts and there is no further association between us. O amiable
one! You have accomplished your objective. My purpose has also been met. You have no other purpose with me,
other than eating me. I am the food and you are the feeder. I am weak and you are strong. When we are unequal in
strength, there can be no alliance between us. I honour your wisdom. Immediately after being freed, you wish to
assure me of happiness and safety and wish to hunt and devour me. You were caught because you were in search
of food. Having been freed, you have ventured out for food. I know about the sacred texts. You are seeking an alliance with me because you certainly wish to eat me. I know that you are hungry and that it is the time for you to
eat. You are seeking an alliance with me, because you wish to hunt and eat me. O friend! You have sons and wives
and are looking towards me. You say that you wish to act so as to serve me. But I don't find that appealing. If your
beloved wife and sons see me with you, will they be cheerful at this affection? Will they not eat me up? I will not
associate with you. The reason for our association is over. If you remember the good deed I did for you, think of
what will be auspicious for me now. Will a wise person venture out of his territory when a natural enemy is afflicted and hungry and is hunting for food? May you be safe. I will go far away from you. O Lomasha! Retreat. I will
not associate with you. Proximity with someone who is powerful is never praised. O wise one! I must always be
terrified of stronger ones, even if they are peaceful. If there is anything else that I can do for you, tell me what I
should do for you. I will give everything that you desire, but I will never give up my own self. To protect one's
own self, offspring, a kingdom, jewels and prosperity can be given up. For the sake of protecting one's own self,
everything should be given up. We have heard that it has been seen that prosperity, wealth and gems, even if they
are presently with enemies, return if one acts so as to remain alive. It is said that riches and jewels can be given up,
but not one's own self. The self must always be protected, even at the cost of wives and riches. If men act so as to
protect the foundations of their lives, having examined the reasons properly, they do not confront any catastrophes
that result from their own sins. If the weak know the stronger enemy well and have made up their minds to protect
themselves, they cannot be dislodged from that resolution.' Thus did Palita speak these words of censure.

'"The cat was ashamed and spoke these words to the rat. 'I honour your wisdom and the fact that you are devoted to my welfare. You have spoken words that are full of reason, though my views have been different. O virtuous
one! But you should not take me to be other than what I am. You have truly granted me my life and my affection
results from that. I know about dharma. I know about the qualities. In particular, I am grateful. I am affectionate
towards my friends, especially those who are like you. O virtuous one! Given these reasons, you should not avoid
me. If you avoid me, I, and all my relatives, will give up our lives. I am spirited and the wise have said that words
of censure are enough to instruct people like me. You know about the nature of dharma. You should not suspect
that I might be the cause of your death.' Having been thus praised by the cat, the rat thought and spoke these grave
and purposeful words to the cat. 'You are virtuous and I have heard the words of reason you have spoken to me.
Though I am pleased, I do not trust you. By praising me, or by offering me riches, you won't be able to get me to
associate with you. O friend! The wise do not subjugate themselves to the enemy. On this, there was a verse sung
by Ushanas. Listen to it. "If one has had an agreement with a more powerful enemy to achieve a common end, one
must act in a controlled way. Once the task has been accomplished, one should not trust. In every situation, one
must protect one's own life. All one's possessions and offspring exist only as long as one is alive. In brief, the
supreme view of all the texts about policy is that one should not trust. Therefore, if one desires the welfare of one's
own self, one must completely distrust men[That is, other men, not in the sense of rats or cats versus men.]. Those who are weak, but do not trust, are not killed by their enemies. But if they trust, even the relatively strong are quickly slain by the weak." O cat! Thus, I must always protect
my own self from someone like you. You must also protect yourself from the chandala, whose anger has been generated.' As it was speaking in this way, terror arose in the cat and it swiftly entered its hole. Palita knew about the
true purport of the sacred texts and was full of intelligence and capacity. It was wise. Having said all this, it went to
another hole. Palita was wise and intelligent, though weak. Because of this, though alone, it was able to overcome
many other immensely strong enemies. A learned person must have an alliance with a capable enemy, just as the
rat and the cat resorted to each other and escaped.

'"I have instructed you about the path to be followed in the dharma of kshatriyas. O lord of the earth! I have recounted it in detail. Listen to it briefly again. Those two were firm in their enmity towards each other, but acted
with supreme affection. They then turned their minds towards subjugating each other. However, by resorting to the
strength of its intelligence, the wiser one subjugated the other one. But if care is not exercised, a wiser person can
be subjugated, even by someone who is not learned. A person who is scared must act as if he is not scared. Even if
he does not trust, he must act as if he trusts. One must be careful and not be fickle. If one is fickle, one is destroyed. There is a time for allying with enemies. There is a time for fighting with friends. O Yudhishthira! Those
who know about the truth have said that one must always act in this way. O great king! Having thought about this,
having understood the purport of the sacred texts and having engaged oneself with care, one must act fearfully, before the cause for fright presents itself. One must determine one's action as if one is frightened and decide on counters. Intelligence results from fear, provided that one engages oneself with care. O king! There is no fear for a person who is frightened of fear that hasn't materialized. However, a great fear is generated for a person who is not
frightened, but is careless. One must never offer the counsel, 'Do not be scared.' That leads to ignorance. If one
knows, one can go to those who know about a means to get out of the hardship. A person who is scared must therefore act as if he is not scared. Even if he does not trust, he must act as if he trusts. Having comprehended the gravity of the task, he must not indulge in any falsehood. O Yudhishthira! In this way, I have recounted the history to
you. O son! Having heard in the midst of these well-wishers, act accordingly. Use your intelligence to first know
the difference between an enemy and a friend, the time for war and peace and means of escaping from a difficulty.
For a common objective, one must have an alliance with a stronger enemy. One must associate and act in accordance with the agreement. However, having accomplished the objective, one must not trust. O Yudhishthira! This
policy is not against the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. Having been instructed and heard, delight the subjects again. O Panda-
va! Along your path, advance with the brahmanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Brahmanas bring the
greatest benefit, in this world and in heaven. O lord! They know about dharma and are always grateful. O lord of
men! They are auspicious in their deeds and if revered first, ensure victory. O king! The kingdom is the supreme
goal. After that, as is proper, in due course, you will obtain fame, deeds and offspring in the lineage. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! If a king knows about these excellent words about war and peace, full of specific intelligence, he should always looks towards them and practise them, when that king is encircled by enemies."'
