'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! O one who knows about the measure of different things! Tell me about the names
and the measures of rivers, mountains, places inhabited by people, everything else on earth and forests. O Sanjaya!
Tell me everything."

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! Because everything in the earth is based on the five universal constituents, the
learned regard all of them as equal. These are bhumi, apa, vayu, agni and akasha. Each of them does not possess a
quality from the preceding one. Therefore, bhumi is the foremost, as has been said by the rishis who know the truth
about the qualities. These are sound, touch, sight and taste, with smell as the fifth[Bhumi possesses all the five qualities.]. O king! There are four qualities in apa, it does not possess smell. There are three qualities in tejas-sound, touch and sight. Vayu has sound
and touch, while akasha has only sound. O king! These five qualities exist in the five constituents of matter, and
beings in all the worlds are established on them. When there is homogeneity, they exist separately and independently[Before creation. This is a reference to the five constituents of matter, not the qualities.]. When they do not exist in their natural state, they depend on each other and embodied beings are created.
There is no exception to this. They are destroyed, with the one that succeeds merging into the one that precedes it.
They are created in that way too, with each resulting from the one that precedes it[At the time of destruction, earth merges into water, water merges into fire, fire merges into air and air merges
into ether. At the time of creation, air is created from ether, fire is created from air, water is created from fire and
the earth is created from water.]. All of them cannot be measured. Their forms are those of the lord himself[Brahma.]. Beings consisting of the five bhutas are seen in the universe.
Men use reason to try and identify their measure[The bhutas, constituents of matter or elements.]. But these are things that cannot be thought of. They cannot be
fathomed through reason. They are beyond nature and this is a sign that they are inconceivable. O descendant of
the Kuru lineage! I will now tell you about the island named Sudarshana[These shlokas about Sudarshana are difficult to understand. Perhaps some allegory is intended and the text is not
meant to be taken literally.]. O great king! This island is circular
and in the form of a wheel. It is full of rivers and other waterbodies. It has mountains that look like masses of
clouds. It has cities of different types and beautiful countries. It has trees laden with flowers and fruits and is prosperous, with riches and crops. It is surrounded in every direction by the salty ocean. Just as a man can see his own
face in a mirror, the island Sudarshana can be seen in the disc of the moon. Two of its parts look like the pippala[Sacred fig tree, kind of banyan. Also known as plaksha and pipal.]
and two others look like a large hare. It is surrounded on all sides with every kind of medicinal plants. Besides this,
everything else is water, and listen as I briefly describe this to you."'
