Yudhishthira said, "O foremost among the Kuru lineage! Tell me again about the supreme ordinances associated  with  donations.  O  immensely  fortunate  one!  Especially  tell  me  about  gifts  of  land.  Through  his  own
deeds[Having conquered the earth first.], a kshatriya must donate the earth to brahmanas and they must receive it, following the rites. No one else[Other than a kshatriya.]
should donate it. Desiring the fruits, all the varnas must donate according to their capacities. The Vedas have enumerated this and you should explain it to me."

'Bhishma replied, "There are three gifts that have the same name and lead to the same kind of fruits. They lead
to all the fruits of desire being met and they are a cow, the earth and Sarasvati. A person who tells his disciple
about the dharma of Brahmi Sarasvati obtains fruits that are equal to those obtained from donating the earth and
cows[This requires explanation. The word go means speech, the earth and cow. Hence, all three have the same name.
Brahmi means holy or divine and Brahmi Sarasvati is holy speech, or the teachings of the Vedas. Teaching this
to a disciple is like donating speech.]. Cows are also praised in that way and there is no gift that is superior. O Yudhishthira! From their donation,
one can also reap the best fruits. Cattle are the mothers of all creatures and yield all kinds of happiness. A person
who desires his prosperity must always give cows as dakshina. They are the auspicious abodes of divinity and
must always be worshipped. Earlier, when gods used cattle to till the land, they goaded them. Therefore, it is permissible to goad them in such a task, but never for anything else. When cows are grazing, drinking water or lying
down, they must not be disturbed. When they are thirsty, even by looking at a man, they are capable of killing him
and his relatives. The seats of the ancestors and the seats of the gods are purified with cow dung. What can be
more pure than them? Before he himself eats, if a person gives someone else's cow a handful of grass daily, for an
entire year, that is like performing a vow that satisfies all the objects of desire. He obtains sons, fame, riches and
prosperity. Everything inauspicious is destroyed and his nightmares melt away."

'Yudhishthira asked, "What are the signs of cattle that can be given and which are the ones to be avoided? Who
is a good recipient and who are the ones to whom one shouldn't give?"

'Bhishma replied, "A cow must never be given to a person who is wicked in conduct, sinful, greedy, untruthful
in speech and one who does not render offerings to the ancestors and the gods. If a person gives ten cows to a
learned  brahmana  who  seeks  alms,  has  many  sons  and  makes  offerings  to  the  fire,  the  donor  obtains  supreme
worlds. If a person performs acts of dharma with possessions he has obtained from someone else, then both the actor and the original owner get a share of the auspicious merits. A person who is the biological father, a person who
saves from great fear and a person who provides means of subsistence-these are the three types of fathers. Sins
are destroyed by serving a preceptor. Insolence destroys great fame. If one has three sons, then one is no longer a
person without a son[At least three sons are required before a person can be said to have sons.]. Ten cows ensure a means of subsistence. Means of sustenance must be created for a brahmana who is devoted to Vedanta, is extremely learned, is content in his wisdom, has conquered his senses, is virtuous and self-controlled, is pleasant in speech towards all beings, is one who will not perform a perverse deed out of
a  minor  fear,  is  mild  and  generous,  is  always  attentive  towards  guests,  has  sons  and  wives  and  is  equal  in
conduct[To the donor.]. The merits obtained from giving a cow to a recipient who possesses the qualities are equal to the demerits substracted if one seizes a brahmana's possessions. In every situation, one must avoid taking away a brahmana's
possessions and one must maintain a distance from his wives."'
