Vaishampayana said, 'When the Kuru prince[Duryodhana.] and Bhima, supreme among strong ones, descended into the arena,
the spectators divided into two factions, each partial towards its own favourite. Some cried, "Look at the valorous
Kuru prince." Others cried, "Look at the valorous Bhima." A great roar arose from the cheers of the spectators. On
seeing that the place had become like a turbulent ocean, the wise son of Bharadvaja spoke to his beloved son Ashvatthama. Drona said, "Stop those two great warriors, both skilled. Let this crowd not become angered over Bhima
and Duryodhana." Restrained by their preceptor's son, those two raised their clubs, like violent oceans lashed by
tempests at the time of the world's destruction.

'Then Drona entered the arena and stopped the musical instruments in a voice that was as deep as the thunder of
the clouds. "Now behold Partha, who is dearer to me than my own son. He is skilled in the use of all weapons. He
is Indra's son himself and is like Indra's younger brother." With his entrance blessed by his preceptor, the youthful
Phalguni[Name for Arjuna. Phalguna and Phalguni are used synonymously.] appeared. He wore a finger protector and arm guard[The arm guard is called a godha. It was made out of leather and fastened to the left arm, to guard against injury from the string of the bow, since most archers were right-handed. A godha is also an alligator or lizard. The
finger protector is called angulitrana. It was also used to protect against injury from the bowstring. It resembled a
thimble and was usually used on the thumb. But it could also be used on other fingers.],his quiver was full of arrows and he had a bow
in his hand. He wore golden armour and he looked like an evening cloud reflecting the rays of the setting sun, radiant as a rainbow with lightning flashes. At this, a loud roar of joy arose everywhere in the arena. Musical instruments and conch shells sounded. "This is the middle Pandava, Kunti's illustrious son." "This is the great Indra's
son, the protector of the Kurus." "This is the supreme one among those who are skilled in the use of weapons."

"This is the supreme one among those who tread the path of dharma." "This is the foremost one in good conduct."

"This is the treasury in knowledge of good conduct." Hearing these loud and incomparable words from the spectators, Kunti's tears mingled with milk from her breasts and made them damp.

'Dhritarashtra's ears were filled with the great roar and that best of men happily asked Vidura, "O kshatta! What
is this great uproar like the sound of a stormy sea, which suddenly arises in this arena and resonates in the sky?"

Vidura replied, "O great king! Pandu and Pritha's son, Phalguni, clad in his armour, has entered. Hence, this uproar." Dhritarashtra said, "O one with great intelligence! I am indeed fortunate and favoured that I am protected by
the flames of these three Pandavas, obtained from Pritha's kindling." When the arena had become somewhat quiet,
Bibhatsu[Arjuna.] began to exhibit the lightness in use of weapons he had learned from his preceptor.

'He created fire with an agneya weapon. He created water with a varuna weapon. He created winds with a
vayavya weapon. He created rain with a parjanya weapon. He entered the ground with a bhoumya weapon. He created mountains with a parvata weapon. He made everything disappear with an antardhana weapon. In an instant,
he appeared tall, then short. In an instant, he was yoked to his chariot. In another, he was in the middle of his chariot. And in another instant, he was on the ground again. Trained well, the preceptor's favourite used various types
of arrows to shoot various targets, some fragile, some fine and still others thick. When an iron boar was moved, he
shot five continuous arrows into its mouth, as if they were but one arrow. A cow's hollow horn was swayed on a
rope and the immensely valorous hero shot twenty-one arrows into it. In this way, he exhibited his great dexterity
in the use of the sword, the bow, the club and other weapons.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The tournament was almost over. The musical instruments were quiet.
The spectators had thinned. At that time, there was heard at the gate the sound of arms being slapped, signalling
power and strength, like the crash of thunder. "Are the mountains being splintered?" "Is the earth breaking up?"

"Is the sky echoing with the roar of clouds filled with rain?" O ruler of the earth! The spectators in the arena
thought in this way and turned their eyes towards the gate. Surrounded by the five brothers, Pritha's sons, Drona
looked like the moon surrounded by five stars. With Ashvatthama, Duryodhana, the slayer of enemies, stood up
quickly, surrounded by his 100 haughty brothers. He had a club in his hand and his 100 brothers circled him, with
weapons raised, looking like Purandara[Indra.] of ancient times, surrounded by the gods at the time of doing battle and
destroying the danavas.'
