'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have said that good conduct is the most important thing for a man. How
does hope arise and what is its nature? Tell me this. O grandfather! This great doubt has arisen in me. O destroyer
of enemy cities! There is no one other than you who knows the truth and can dispel this. O grandfather! I had a
great deal of hope about Suyodhana. O lord! When war was near, I thought that he would act as he had been asked
to. A great hope is generated in a man and it becomes everything. When that is destroyed, there is no doubt that he
suffers a misery that is like death. The evil-minded and evil-souled son of Dhritarashtra destroyed all my hopes. O
Indra among kings! I think that I have been foolish. I think that hope is greater than a mountain with all its trees. O
king! Or perhaps it is as immeasurable as the sky. O best among the Kuru lineage! It is extremely difficult to understand it[Hope.] and it is extremely difficult to obtain. I can see that it is extremely difficult to obtain. Is there anything that is more difficult to obtain than that?"

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! In this connection, listen to what happened. This is the history of what transpired between Sumitra and Rishabha. Among the Haihayas, there was a rajarshi named Sumitra and he went out
on a hunt. Having pursued a deer, he pierced it with an arrow with drooping tufts. The deer was infinite in its valour. Despite being struck by the arrow, it continued to flee and the powerful king swiftly dashed after the deer. O
Indra among kings! The deer quickly fled through a hollow and in an instant, began to run through flat terrain
again. The king was young, enterprising and strong. With arrows, a bow and a sword, he pursued it, like a swan.
He plunged through male and female rivers, lakes and woods. Having crossed through places that were difficult to
cross, he chased it into a forest. As it desired, the deer sometimes showed itself to the king and sometimes hid itself from the king. It would then speed on, acquiring greater speed. He struck the resident of the forest with many
arrows. O Indra among kings! But it seemed to be playing with him and would again approach near. The leader of
a herd of deer would then again speed up, resorting to a greater speed. O Indra among kings! It would forge ahead
and then again appear nearby. Sumitra, the destroyer of enemies, affixed a foremost and fierce arrow that was capable of penetrating the inner organs and released it from his bow. However, the leader of a herd of deer advanced far
ahead, by a distance that was more than one govyuti[Measure of distance, distance from which a cow's bellow can he heard.], beyond the reach of the arrow. It then stood there, seeming to laugh at the king. The blazing arrow fell down on the ground.

'"The deer entered a great forest and the king pursued it there. Having entered the great forest, the king approached a hermitage of ascetics. He was tired and seated himself. The assembled rishis saw him there, with the
bow in his hand, exhausted, afflicted and hungry. Following the prescribed rites, they honoured him. The rishis
asked that tiger among kings what he wanted. 'O fortunate one! What is the reason behind your coming to this hermitage? O lord of men! Though you are on foot, you have girded your sword and have a bow and arrows. O one
who grants honours! We wish to know why you have come here. What lineage have you been born in? Tell us
what your name is.' O bull among men! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At this, the king told the brahmanas
everything and also about the pursuit. 'I have been born in the lineage of the Haihayas. I am Sumitra, the son of
Mitra. I was roaming around, slaying herds of deer with thousands of arrows. I am protected by a large army and
the advisers and women are with me. I pierced a deer with my arrow. But though pierced by my arrow, it ran away.
While running after it as I desired, I arrived in this forest and near you. My prosperity has been destroyed. My
hopes have been destroyed. My enterprise has also been destroyed. O ones who are rich in austerities! Having to
abandon the signs of the kingship or giving up the city does not cause me as fierce a misery as the dashing of my
hopes. The Himalayas, giant among mountains, the ocean, the great store of water are regarded as vast and so is
the space between heaven and earth. O ones who are best in austerities! But I cannot see any boundaries to hope. O
ones rich in austerities! Everything is known to you. You know everything. O immensely fortunate ones! I am
therefore presenting you with the doubt I have. Which seems to be greater in this world, the hope of a man, or the
sky? I wish to hear the truth about this. Which is more difficult to obtain? O ones who are always engaged in austerities! If this is not a secret, tell me, without any delay. O bulls among brahmanas! If you do not regard this to be
a secret, I wish to hear. However, if this causes a distraction in your austerities, I will desist. I do not wish my
question to lead to a long discussion. These are the reasons I wish to hear the truth about this, in detail. You are always engaged in austerities and are extremely controlled. You should tell me.'"'
