'Markandeya said, "On seeing Ravana arrive, Maricha respectfully showed him homage and gave him fruits, roots
and other objects. When the rakshasa had rested and was appropriately seated, the one who was skilled with words
spoke these words to the one who was eloquent with words[Respectively, Maricha and Ravana. Maricha is doing the initial speaking.]. 'Your complexion is not in its natural state. Is
everything well in your city? Do all your subjects honour you, as they used to do earlier? O lord of the rakshasas!
What task has brought you here? Even if the task is difficult to accomplish, know that it has already been done.'

Ravana told him everything about what Rama had done. After listening, Maricha briefly told him, 'You must not
provoke Rama. I am acquainted with his valour. Is there anyone who can withstand the force of the arrows of that
great-souled one? The bull among men is responsible for my leading the life of an ascetic. What evil-souled one
has directed you to this course of action that will take you to the mouth of destruction?' On hearing this, Ravana
angrily berated him. 'If you do not act in accordance with my words, it is certain that you will meet with death.'

Maricha then thought to himself, 'It is better to die at the hands of a superior being. Since death is certain, I will do
what he wants me to.' Maricha then replied to the lord of the rakshasas. 'What help can I render you? I will do it
even if I am not capable.' Then Dashagriva told him, 'Go and tempt Sita. Become a deer with jewels on its antlers
and with a skin that is adorned with gems. It is certain that on seeing you, Sita will send Rama after you. With
Kakutstha[Rama's name, because Kakutstha was one of his ancestors and Raghu was Kakutstha's son.] gone, Sita will be in my powers. I will then abduct her. The evil-minded one will cease to exist because of separation from his wife. Render this help to me.' Having been thus addressed, Maricha performed the
rites with water for himself[Funeral rites, since Maricha knew that he was certain to die.]. Extremely miserable, he followed Ravana, who led the way. The two went to the
hermitage of Rama, the one whose deeds were unsullied. They acted exactly as they had planned it earlier. Ravana
assumed the form of an ascetic, with his head shaven and with a three-poled staff in his hand[Tridanda, the mark of a mendicant who has renounced the world. Three poles are tied together as one and
held in the right hand.]. Maricha assumed
the form of a deer and they went to that spot. Maricha showed himself to Vaidehi, in the form of a deer. Prompted
by destiny, she sent Rama after him.

'"With a view to please her, Rama swiftly grasped his bow. He entrusted Lakshmana with the task of protecting
her and went after the deer. He had his bow and had tied his quiver. He had his sword and guards for his arms and
fingers. Rama followed the deer, like Rudra after the deer that is a star[The nakshatra Mrigashira, or deer's head in the sky, straddling Taurus and Gemini. Also known as Margashirsha. The twenty-seven nakshatras are sometimes described as Brahma's daughters and Brahma lusted after
Rohini, chasing her in the form of a deer or antelope. Shiva (Rudra) pursued the deer and cut off one of its heads.
This became Mrighashira.]. The rakshasa appeared before him and
disappeared again, taking him far away. Rama knew him to be who he really was. Knowing him to be a traveller of
the night[A rakshasa.], the wise Raghava grasped an unfailing arrow and killed him, in the form of a deer. Struck by Rama's
arrow, he imitated Rama's voice and called out, in a piteous voice, 'Alas, Sita! Lakshmana!' When Vaidehi heard
those piteous words, she was about to run in the direction of the words. But Lakshmana spoke to her. 'O timid one!
Do not be anxious. Who can strike Rama? O sweet-smiling one! You will see Rama return in a short while.' She
was weeping. At these words, because of the tendency of women, she suspected her younger brother-in-law,
though his pure character was his adornment. The chaste and faithful wife uttered harsh words. 'O stupid one! This
is not the time for satisfying the desire in your heart. I would rather take a sword and kill myself, or throw myself
from the peak of a mountain, or enter the fire, rather than abandon my husband Rama and serve a mean one like
you, like a tigress waiting on a jackal.' Lakshmana loved Raghava and was always virtuous. On hearing these
words, he covered up his ears and left for where Raghava was. He grasped a bow and followed Rama's footsteps.

'"Meanwhile, rakshasa Ravana made his appearance. Though he was wicked, he assumed a gentle form, like a
fire hidden under ashes. He disguised himself as an ascetic, because he desired to abduct that unblemished one. On
seeing him arrive, Janaka's virtuous daughter invited him, with fruits, roots, a seat and other things. But the bull
among rakshasas ignored all this and assuming his own form, sought to appease Vaidehi. 'O Sita! I am the king of
the rakshasas, famous as Ravana. My beautiful city of Lanka is located on the other side of the great ocean.
Among the beautiful women who are there, you will shine with me. O one with the beautiful hips! Become my
wife and abandon the ascetic Raghava.' When Janaki Sita heard words like these, the one with the beautiful hips
covered up her ears and said, 'Do not speak such words. The sky may fall with its stars. The earth may be shattered. The fire may become cold. But I will not desert the descendant of the Raghu lineage. Can a she-elephant, after serving a giant elephant that is in musth and ranges the forest, touch a hog? How can a lady who has drunk
choice liquor[Madhvika.] and drunk nectar made out of honey, be attracted by the juice of the jujube tree?' Having spoken
these words, she entered the hermitage again. Ravana followed the one with the beautiful hips and restrained her.
Censured by his harsh words, she lost her senses. But he grasped her by the hair on her head and rose up into the
sky. A vulture named Jatayu, who lived on a mountain, saw the ascetic lady being abducted, lamenting, 'Rama!
Rama!'"'
