'Shalya said, "Having seen her, Nahusha, king of the gods, addressed her thus. 'O one with the beautiful smiles! I
am Indra of the three worlds. O one with the beautiful thighs! O one with the beautiful complexion! Serve me as
your husband.' Having been thus addressed by Nahusha, the goddess, who was devoted to her husband, trembled
in fear, like a plantain tree during a storm. She joined her hands in salutation and bowed her head before Brahma.
She told Nahusha, king of the gods whose visage was terrible, 'O lord of the gods! I am asking for some time from
you. I do not know where Shakra is. I do not know where he has gone. O lord! Let me try to ascertain the truth.
Alternatively, if this cannot be found out, I will serve you. I am telling you this truthfully.' Having been thus addressed by Indrani, Nahusha was delighted. Nahusha replied, 'O one with the beautiful hips! It will be as you say.
Once you have got to know, your task is to come here. Remember the truth you have sworn.' Thus given permission by Nahusha, the beautiful one departed. The ascetic one went to Brihaspati's abode.

'"O supreme among kings! On hearing her words, the gods, with Agni at the forefront, began to consult about
what might be done for the sake of Shakra. They went and met Vishnu, the god of the gods and anxious, the ones
who were eloquent with words addressed these words to the lord Vishnu. 'Shakra, the lord of the masses of gods,
has been burdened because he has killed a brahmana[Both Trishira and Vritra were the sons of a brahmana.]. O lord of the gods! You are our refuge. O lord! You were
there before the universe was created. You assumed the form of Vishnu for the sake of protecting all beings. When
Vasava slew Vritra through your valour, he was burdened because he had killed a brahmana. O supreme among the
masses of gods! You decide on a way for him to be freed.' Having heard the words of the gods, Vishnu replied,
'Let Shakra offer a sacrifice to me. I will purify the wielder of the vajra. Having worshipped me, let the chastiser of
Paka perform a holy horse sacrifice. Without any fear, he will then become Indra of the gods again. The evil-minded Nahusha will ensure his destruction through his own deeds. O gods! You must be patient and endure him for
some time.' Having heard the pure and true words of Vishnu, which were like amrita, all the masses of gods, the
preceptors[The specific preceptor is Brihaspati, in the singular. In the plural, this is being used in a general sense.] and the gods went to the region where Shakra had hidden himself, anxious with fear.

'"Then the great-souled and great Indra performed the extremely great horse sacrifice. O king! This was for the
sake of purifying him from the taint of killing a brahmana. O Yudhishthira! He distributed the killing of a brahmana over trees, rivers, mountains, the earth and women[The sin was distributed over these objects. Trees, rivers, mountains and the earth are fertile. Women have presumably been included also because of the notion of fertility.]. With it having been thrown out and distributed among
beings, the lord of the gods was cleansed of his fever. Vasava's soul became pure and he assumed his earlier form.
The slayer of Bala saw that Nahusha was not going to move from his position. Having obtained the boon, he was
now unassailable, because he had absorbed the energy of all beings. Therefore, the god who was Shachi's husband
vanished again. Waiting for the appropriate time, he remained invisible to all beings. When Shakra seemed to have
been destroyed, Shachi was immersed in grief. In great misery, the goddess began to lament. 'Alas, Shakra! If I
have ever given, if I have ever received gifts, if my seniors have been satisfied with me, if there is any truth in me,
I will only have one husband. I am bowing down before this divine and auspicious goddess Night, which has now
embarked on a northern course[The night has been personified as a goddess. The northern course is uttarayana, the progress of the sun to the
north of the equator.]. May my wishes be fulfilled.' When Night arrived, the goddess worshipped her.
Because of her devotion to her husband and because of her truthfulness, Upashruti[Upashruti is the personification of a supernatural voice that is heard at night. Alternatively, it is a nocturnal deity
who reveals the future.] appeared before her. The goddess asked Upashruti, 'Show me the region where the king of the gods is. Use the truth to show me the truth.'"'
