Utanka said, "O Keshava! Tell me the truth about unblemished adhyatma. O Janardana! After having heard
you, I will decide whether I should curse you or not."

'Vasudeva replied, "Know that the three qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas that exist have me as a refuge. O
brahmana! In that way, know that the Rudras and the Vasus have originated from me. All the beings are in me and
I am in all the beings. Know that this is the state and you should not have any doubt about this. O brahmana! Know
that  all  the  large  numbers  of  daityas,  yakshas,  rakshasas,  serpents,  gandharvas  and  apsaras  originate  from  me.
Everything that exists, everything that does not exist, the manifest, the unmanifest, the indestructible and the destructible-all these come from my soul. O sage! The dharma that has been laid down for the four ashramas and
the rites for the gods-know that all these come from my soul. In the universe, there is the existent and the existent/non-existent[Existent/non-existent means objects that exist, but are subject to periodical destruction, when they cease to exist.]. However, I am supreme, beyond existence and non-existence. I am the eternal god of the gods
and there is nothing superior to me. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! Know me to be the Vedas and Omkara. I am
the sacrificial stake. I am soma. I am the oblations that are offered to gods in sacrifices. I am the hotar[There are four types of officiating priests-hotar (one who recites from the Rig Veda), udgatar (one who recites
from the Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who recites from the Yajur Veda) and brahman (one who recites from the
Atharva Veda).]. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Know me also to be the oblations that are offered. I am the adhvaryu. I am the one
who thinks of the supremely cleansed sacrificial libations. I am the udgatar. I am the one who is praised in the loud
sounds of the chants. O brahmana! Know me to be atonement and the words of peace and benediction. I am always
praised by the best of brahmanas as the creator of the universe. O supreme among brahmanas! Know Dharma to be
my eldest son. O brahmana! It is out of compassion towards all creatures that I mentally created him out of my
own self. I am present in men in the form of nivritti. O supreme among brahmanas! In the form of fire, I move
around in wombs. O Bhargava! In the three worlds, I assume those forms for the sake of protecting dharma and for
the sake of establishing dharma. I am Vishnu. I am Brahma. I am Shakra. I am the origin and the end of all the different categories of beings. I am the creator and the destroyer. Among all those who practise adharma, I bind them
down as the bridge of dharma, moving around from one yuga to another. In a desire to ensure the welfare of subjects, I enter various wombs. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! When I am born in a divine womb, there is no
doubt that I follow all the acts followed by the gods. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! O Bhargava! In that way,
when I am born in the womb of a gandharva, I then make all the efforts that are made by gandharvas. When I am
in the womb of a serpent, I then behave like a serpent. When I am born in the wombs of yakshas and rakshasas, I
then follow their kinds of conduct. Since I am now a human, I beseeched them piteously. However, because of the
delusion that was engendered in them, they did not accept my beneficial words. I instructed the Kurus with the
prospects of great fear and terrified them, overcome with rage[This is a reference to Krishna revealing his divine and universal form.]. Then I again assumed my earlier form[Human form.] and instructed them. But they were addicted to adharma and were overwhelmed by the dharma of time. Following dharma, they have been slain in the battle and there is no doubt that they have gone to heaven. O supreme among brahmanas! In  this  world,  the  Pandavas  obtained  fame.  I  have  thus  recounted  everything  that  you  had  asked  me
about."'
