'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that his own soldiers had been killed, King Duryodhana angrily attacked Bhimasena, the
destroyer of enemies. He grasped a giant bow, which had a sound like that of Indra's vajra. He covered Pandava
with a great shower of arrows. He was full of rage. He affixed an extremely sharp arrow that was in the shape of a
half-moon and was tufted with hair. He sliced down Bhimasena's bow with this. Thereafter, the maharatha saw an
opportunity. He affixed an extremely sharp arrow that was capable of shattering a mountain. With this, the mighty-
armed one struck Bhimasena in the chest. He was severely pierced and wounded and licked the corners of his
mouth. The energetic one sought the support of his standard, which was decorated with gold. On seeing Bhimasena in that dispirited state, Ghatotkacha blazed up in anger, like a fire that can consume everything. With Abhimanyu at the forefront, all the maharatha Pandavas dashed angrily towards the king, roaring loudly. On seeing
them advance, in fury and rage, Bharadvaja's son spoke these words to the maharathas on your side. 'O fortunate
ones! Go swiftly and protect the king. I think he confronts a great danger and is submerged in an ocean of distress.
These maharatha Pandavas are great archers and are angry. With Bhimasena at the forefront, they are attacking
Duryodhana. With victory in mind, they are using many different kinds of weapons. They are uttering terrible roars
and are terrifying the kings[Obviously, on the Kourava side.].' On hearing the words of the preceptor, with Somadatta at the forefront, many on
your side attacked the army of the Pandavas-Kripa, Bhurishrava, Shalya, Drona's son, Vivimshati, Chitrasena,
Vikarna, Saindhava, Brihadbala and the two great archers from Avanti. They surrounded Kourava. They advanced
only twenty steps and began to strike each other. The Pandavas and the sons of Dhritrashtra sought to kill each
other.

'"Having spoken those words, Bharadvaja's mighty-armed son stretched his own gigantic bow and pierced Bhi-
ma with twenty-six arrows. Yet again, the mighty-armed one quickly enveloped him with arrows. It was like the
slayer of Bala showering rain on a mountain during autumn. However, Bhimasena was extremely strong. The great
archer swiftly pierced him back on the left side with ten arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was severely pierced and wounded. He was also elderly in years. He became unconscious and suddenly sat down on the
floor of his chariot. On seeing that the preceptor was wounded, King Duryodhana himself, and Drona's son, became angry and attacked Bhimasena. Each of them was like Yama at the end of a yuga. On seeing them advance,
the mighty-armed Bhimasena quickly grasped a club. He instantly descended from his chariot and stood, as immobile as a mountain. That heavy club looked like Yama's staff, raised in battle. On seeing him with the upraised
club, like the summit of Kailasa, Kourava and Drona's son rushed at him, together. Vrikodara also swiftly rushed
at those supreme among strong ones, as they forcefully advanced against him. On seeing him advance in rage, terrible in his visage, many Kourava maharathas quickly attacked him. With Bharadvaja's son[This actually means Ashvatthama, the word son being used in a loose sense.] at the forefront, all
of them wished to kill Bhimasena. They hurled many different kinds of weapons towards Bhima's chest. Together,
all of them oppressed Pandava from every direction. On beholding that the maharatha was oppressed and faced a
great danger, Abhimanyu and the other Pandava maharathas advanced to rescue him, ready to give up their lives.
The brave lord of the marshy regions was Bhima's beloved friend. Nila possessed a complexion that was blue like
the clouds and in anger, he attacked Drona's son. The great archer had always sought to challenge Drona's son. He
drew his large bow and pierced Drona's son with arrows. O great king! It was like Shakra piercing the invincible
danava Viprachitti, who was the terror of the gods, in earlier times. Through his anger and energy, he had terrified
the three worlds. In that way, Nila pierced him with arrows that were well-tipped[Viprachitti was a famous demon and was the son of Kashyapa and Danu. Kashyapa and Danu had 100 sons
and Viprachitti is described as the most powerful of the lot.]. Drona's son was wounded
and covered with blood and overcome with rage. He drew his colourful bow, with a roar like that of Indra's vajra.
The supreme among intelligent ones made up his mind to destroy Nila. He affixed polished and broad-headed arrows that had been crafted by a blacksmith and slew his[Nila's.] four horses and brought down his standard. With a
seventh broad-headed arrow, he pierced Nila in the breast[Some non-critical versions mention the charioteer too. In that event, we have a tally for the seven arrows-four
for the horses, one for the charioteer, one for the standard and one for Nila.]. He was severely pierced and wounded and sat down
on his chariot.

'"King Nila possessed the complexion of the clouds. On seeing that he was unconscious, Ghatotkacha became
angry. Surrounded by his brothers, he impetuously rushed towards Drona's son, who was the ornament of any battle. In that fashion, many other rakshasas, invincible in battle, also advanced. On seeing that rakshasa, terrible in
form, advance towards him, Bharadvaja's spirited son became angry and killed many rakshasas, who were terrible
in form, especially those enraged rakshasas who were leading from the front. On seeing that they were repulsed as
a consequence of the arrows released from the bow of Drona's son, Ghatotkacha, Bhimasena's son who was gigantic in size, became angry. He resorted to great maya that was fearful in form and extremely terrible. In that encounter, the lord of the rakshasas, skilled in the use of maya, confounded Drona's son. Because of that maya, all
those on your side retreated. They saw each other lying down immobile on the face of the ground, writhing in convulsions, miserable and covered in blood. Drona, Duryodhana, Shalya, Ashvatthama and the other great archers
who were generally regarded as the foremost among the Kouravas were also in that state. All the chariots seemed
to be shattered, the elephants brought down. Horses and horse-riders were cut down in thousands[All of this was the outcome of an illusion and wasn't real. But the Kourava soldiers didn't see it that way.]. On seeing
this, all the soldiers on our side fled towards their camps. O king! I[Sanjaya saying this is unusual. However, the text allows for no other translation.] and Devavrata shouted, 'Fight. Do not run
away. This is the maya of rakshasas in battle. It has been applied by Ghatotkacha.' But they were confounded and
did not stay. Though both of us shouted in this way, they were frightened and did not pay attention to our words.
On seeing that they were running away, the Pandavas thought that they were victorious. Together with Ghatotkacha, they roared like lions. The roars and the sounds of conch shells and drums resounded in every direction.
Thus all your soldiers were routed by Hidimba's evil-souled son and fled in different directions. It was time for the
sun to set."'
