'Markandeya said, "When Kumbhakarna marched out from the city with his followers, he saw stationed before
him that army of monkeys, flush with victory. The monkeys came up to him and surrounded him from all sides.
They struck him with many gigantic trees. Discarding their fear, others struck at him with their nails and teeth.
Many monkeys, engaged in the path of battle, used different means of fighting and different weapons to attack the
terrible Indra among rakshasas. Thus struck, he only laughed and began to devour the monkeys, like Panasa,
Gavaksha and the monkey Vajrabahu. On witnessing the harrowing deed of the rakshasa Kumbhakarna, Tara and
the others were extremely frightened and let out a large lament. Hearing Tara's cries and those of other chiefs
among monkeys, Sugriva fearlessly rushed at Kumbhakarna. With great force, the high-minded elephant among
monkeys arrived before Kumbhakarna and powerfully struck him on the head with a shala tree. Though the great-
souled one struck Kumbhakarna on the head with great force, the shala tree hurled by the monkey Sugriva only
broke and did not hurt him. It was as if he was suddenly awakened at the touch of the shala tree. Kumbhakarna
laughed and roared and seized Sugriva with great force. On seeing Sugriva grasped by the rakshasa Kumbhakarna,
the brave Soumitri, the delight of his friends, rushed forward. Lakshmana, the destroyer of enemy warriors, unleashed an extremely swift and extremely large arrow, with golden tufts, at Kumbhakarna. That arrow pierced
through his body armour and body. Covered with blood, it then penetrated the earth. With his heart shattered, the
great archer Kumbhakarna released the lord of the monkeys. Grasping a rock as a weapon, he aimed that large rock
and rushed at Soumitri. While he was advancing, he[Lakshmana.] sliced off two of those upraised arms with arrows that
were sharp like razors and he[Kumbhakarna.] then became four-armed. But Soumitri sliced off all those arms, which held rocks
as weapons, with arrows that were like razors. The body now assumed a gigantic size, with many legs, heads and
arms and looked like a mass of rocks. Soumitri burnt it down with brahmastra. Struck by that celestial weapon, the
immensely valorous one fell down in battle, like a tree that has been burnt and uprooted by a stroke of lightning.

'"On seeing the swift Kumbhakarna, who was like Vritra, fall down lifeless on the ground, the rakshasas fled in
fear. On seeing the warriors run away, Dushana's younger brothers restrained them and angrily attacked Soumitri.
On seeing Vajravega and Pramathi wrathfully advance towards him, Soumitri attacked them with feathered shafts.
O Partha! A terrible battle raged between Dushana's younger brothers and the intelligent Lakshmana and it made
the body hair stand up. He enveloped the rakshasas with a large shower of arrows. Those two brave ones also angrily rained down on him. That extremely terrible battle between Vajravega and Pramathi and the mighty-armed
Soumitri lasted only for a short instant. The Hanuman, son of the wind-god, grasped the peak of a mountain and
attacked Vajravega, taking away his life. The immensely strong monkey, Nila, rushed at Dushana's younger brother Pramathi and crushed him with a large rock. There was again a terrible battle between the forces of Rama and
those of Ravana, as they attacked each other. The forest-dwelling ones killed rakshasas by the hundreds and rakshasas killed the forest-dwelling ones[Here, the text uses the word nairrita (meaning demon), rather than rakshasa.]. But the number of rakshasas killed was more than that of monkeys."'
