Vaishampayana said, 'Thereafter, there was a battle between Kiriti and the Saindhavas. O great king! Some of
them had not been killed and there were also the sons of those who had been slain. They heard that the one
with the white horses had come to their kingdom. Those kings found this intolerable and advanced against the bull
among the Pandavas. Though the horse was like poison, when it entered the frontiers of their kingdom, they seized
it. They were not frightened of Partha, Bhimasena's younger brother. Bibhatsu was on foot and received them, stationed not far from the sacrificial horse. Those immensely valorous kings surrounded him. Remembering their earlier defeat in the battle[In Kurukshetra.], those tigers among men were desirous of victory. They announced their names, gotras
and various deeds and having done this, enveloped Partha with showers of arrows. They shot sharp arrows that
were capable of repulsing Indras among elephants. Desiring victory in the encounter, they surrounded Kounteya.
He was on foot and saw those brave ones, capable of performing terrible deeds in a battle. Those valiant ones
fought from their chariots. They struck the brave one, the slayer of the nivatakavachas, the slayer of the samshaptakas and the slayer of Saindhava[Jayadratha.]. They penned in Kounteya with one thousand chariots and ten thousand horses
and fought cheerfully. O Kouravya! Those brave ones remembered the death of Jayadratha, the intelligent king of
Sindhu, at the hands of Savyasachi in the battle. Like clouds, all of them released showers of arrows. Enveloped by
these, Partha was beautiful, like the sun covered by clouds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Covered by those
arrows, the bull among the Pandavas could be seen, like a bird moving around inside a cage. O king! On seeing
that Kounteya was afflicted by those arrows, sounds of lamentation arose in the three worlds and the rays of the
sun were covered in dust. O great king! A wind that made the body hair stand up began to blow. It was as if Rahu
had simultaneously devoured the sun and the moon. From every direction, meteors fell into the sun and were scattered around. O king! Kailasa, the giant mountain, began to tremble. Overcome by sorrow and grief, the saptarshis
and the devarshis were struck by fear and released warm sighs of fright. The moon was swiftly pierced and they[The meteors.]
fell down on the lunar disc. O king! All these perverse portents were witnessed. Clouds that were as red as donkeys covered the sky. They were tinged with bows[Rainbows.] and lightning and showered down flesh and blood. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Thus it was when the brave one was enveloped by those showers of arrows and it
was an extraordinary event on earth. Because of his confusion, Gandiva was dislodged from his hand and fell
down on the ground. His arm guards were loosened. When the maharatha had lost his senses and was overcome by
confusion, the Saindhavas swiftly released another greater net of arrows. Discerning that Partha was overcome by
confusion, all the residents of heaven were terrified in their minds and thought that peace had been defeated. All
the devarshis, the saptarshis and the brahmarshis prayed for the intelligent Partha's victory. O king! Because of
this divine intervention, Partha's energy blazed forth. The intelligent one, who knew about supreme weapons, was
as immobile as a mountain in the battle. The descendant of the Kourava lineage stretched his divine bow. Its great
and repeated twang was like the sound from a machine. The lord showered arrows towards the enemy. Partha
rained these down from his bow, like the lord of the gods showering down rain. All the Saindhava warriors and
their kings were shrouded in these arrows and could no longer be seen. They were like insects headed towards a
fire. They were terrified by the sound and extremely frightened, they fled in different directions. The Saindhavas
lamented loudly in their grief and shed tears. The powerful one roamed around everywhere. The best among men
drove them away. O king! He released that net of arrows and it seemed to be like a circle of fire. The slayer of enemies produced that net of arrows and it was almost magical. He released them in every direction, like the great Indra wielding his vajra. Those soldiers were like a mass of clouds. As he routed them, the best among the Kourava
lineage was resplendent, with a complexion like that of the sun. He looked like the autumn sun.'
