Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Mandapala had meanwhile begun to worry about his
sons. Although he had spoken about them to the one with the piercing rays, his mind was still anxious. In his anxiety for his sons, he told Lapita, "O Lapita! My sons are still incapable of escaping. When the fire grows in strength
and the wind blows swiftly, my sons will be incapable of freeing themselves. Their ascetic mother will be incapable of saving them. She will suffer misery when she sees that she cannot save her sons. My sons are incapable of
running or flying. She will run around, lamenting her misery. How is my son Jaritari? How is Sarisrikva? How are
Stambamitra and Drona and how is that ascetic?" Thus, rishi Mandapala lamented in that forest.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In her jealousy, Lapita replied in these words, "You need not suffer anxiety on account of your sons. You have yourself told me that they are powerful and energetic rishis. They have
nothing to fear from the flames. In my presence, you spoke to Agni on their behalf. The great-souled and blazing
one gave you his promise. Being the protector of the world, he will never utter a falsehood. They are eloquent in
speech and your anxiety is not because of them. You are anxious because you are thinking of my enemy[Jarita.]. It is
certain that you do not love me as much as you loved her earlier. It can never be right that one with two parties
should display no love towards his relative, even when the one close to him suffers. Go to Jarita, for whom you are
suffering. I will wander around alone here, like one who is allied with a wretch[Instead of wretch, the word kapurusha can also be translated as coward.]." Mandapala replied, "I am not
wandering around in this world because of the reasons you believe. I am roaming around for the sake of offspring
and those I have are now facing suffering. He who casts off that which he has, for the sake of that which might be
there, is stupid and the world disregards him. Do what you desire. These blazing flames of Agni are licking the giant trees and are giving birth to a hateful and malevolent sorrow in my heart." After the flames had passed by that
spot, Jarita, who was attached to her sons, swiftly returned to the place where her sons were. Weeping and miserable in the forest, she saw that all her sons were well, having escaped from the fire. On seeing them, she wept
again and again. She embraced her sons one by one and they too wept.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that time, Mandapala suddenly arrived there. But none of his sons displayed any signs of greeting. He spoke to each one of them again and again and also to Jarita. But none of them
uttered a single word to the rishi, good or bad. Mandapala asked, "Which one of you is my eldest son and who is
the one born after that? Who is the one in the middle and who is the youngest? I am speaking to you in misery.
Why aren't you replying to me? I left you to the fire, but I did not find any peace." Jarita replied, "What do you
have to do with the eldest one or with the one who came after him? What do you have to do with the one in the
middle or with the youngest who is an ascetic? You had left me miserable in every way and gone away. Go back to
the young Lapita, the one with the beautiful smile." Mandapala said, "Other than a different man, there is nothing
in this world that is more fatal to women than a co-wife. Even the fortunate Arundhati, renowned in all the worlds
and devoted to her vows, was distrustful of the supreme rishi Vasishtha. He was pure of heart and always devoted
to her welfare. But she was ill disposed towards that saptarshi[The saptarshis or seven (sapta) great sages (rishi) were born from Brahma's mental powers and were
Marichi, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishtha. They are also the seven stars in the constellation
Ursa Major. Arundhati was Vasishtha's wife and is also a companion star to Vasishtha in Ursa Major. Arundhati
was a devoted wife, except for one transgression, which is why Arundhati is invoked in marriage ceremonies. The
star Arundhati is not as dazzling as the star Vasishtha, so it is often difficult to make it out in the night sky and
there is also a belief that a person who is approaching death can no longer see Arundhati.] and because of that insult, she is now a tiny star
that is like fire covered with smoke. She is sometimes visible and sometimes invisible and is seen as an evil omen.
You yourself had a connection with me to obtain offspring. Now it has come to this that you give up what you once
desired and have become like her. A man should never commit the act of trusting a woman, even if she happens to
be a wife. Once a woman has obtained sons, she no longer pays attention to her duties." At this, all his sons came
and paid homage to him. O king! And he too provided reassurances to his sons.'
