Souti said, 'When the powerful Shringi, who was easily prone to anger, heard the news that his father was carrying
a corpse, he was extremely angry. He looked at Krisha and, abandoning all pleasantness of speech, asked, "Why
should my father carry a corpse?" Krisha replied, "O friend! When King Parikshit was roaming around on his hunt
today, he placed a dead snake on your father's shoulders." Shringi asked, "What harm had my father done to that
evil-souled king? O Krisha! Tell me this and you will witness my ascetic powers."

'Krisha said, "Abhimanyu's son, King Parikshit, was out hunting and wounded a swift deer with a feathered arrow. He chased it alone and the king could not see the deer when he roamed in the wilderness of the great forest.
He saw your father and asked him about it. The king was suffering from hunger, thirst and fatigue and repeatedly
asked your father about the missing deer. But your father was under a vow of silence. He was immobile and did
not reply. Thereupon, the king picked up a dead snake with the end of his bow and placed it on his shoulders. O
Shringi! Rigid in his vows, your father is still seated there. However, the king has returned to his city, named after
the elephant[Hastinapura.]."'

Souti said, 'Hearing this, the rishi's son stiffened like a celestial pillar. His eyes reddened with anger and he
looked like a blazing fire. Afflicted with rage and powered by the strength of his anger, the powerful one touched
the water and cursed the king, "The evil-hearted and vile king, the defiler of Brahmanas and disgrace of the Kuru
lineage, who has placed a dead snake on my old and feeble father's shoulders, will, triggered by my words, be taken to the abode of Yama within seven nights from today, bitten by angry Takshaka, the lord of the serpents, and
smitten with the swift virulence of his poison." Having thus angrily cursed the king, Shringi went to his father and
found him seated in the cowshed, the dead snake on his shoulders. On seeing the dead snake on his father's shoulders, Shringi was again possessed by anger. Shedding tears of grief, he told his father, "O father! When I heard
how the evil-hearted King Parikshit insulted you, I cursed him in anger. That worst of the Kuru lineage deserves
such a terrible curse. Within seven days from today, Takshaka, the king of the snakes, will send the evil one to
Vaivasvata's[Vaivasvata is one of Yama's names.] abode."

'At that, the father Shamika told his enraged son, "O son! Your act does not bring me pleasure. This is not the
dharma for ascetics. We live in the domain of that king and we are righteously protected by him. We should not
take note of his evil acts. Ruling kings must always be pardoned by men like us. O son! There is no doubt that if
you destroy dharma, it will destroy you. If the king does not protect us, we will suffer from many afflictions. O
son! We will then not be able to pursue dharma according to our desires. O son! It is because we are protected by
kings, who too know dharma, that we are able to pursue dharma and obtain great merits to which such kings also
have a share. Like his great-grandfather, Parikshit protects us, the way a king should protect his subjects. Today, he
came here tired, hungry and thirsty and he did not know that I was under a vow of silence and he himself practices
austerities. Therefore, you have committed an evil act through childishness. O son! In no way does that king deserve a curse from us."'
