'Sanjaya said, "The intelligent Abhimanyu's body was mangled by the arrows. But he stationed himself before the
enemy and smilingly spoke these words to Duhshasana. 'It is through good fortune that I behold this insolent enemy in the battle today. He is cruel and has abandoned dharma. He is addicted to praising himself. In King Dhritarashtra's hearing and in the assembly hall, you angered Dharmaraja Yudhishthira through your harsh words. Intoxicated with victory[In the gambling match.], you addressed many maddening words towards Bhima. You stole the property of others.
You were enraged. You were not pacified. You were avaricious. Your wisdom was destroyed. You were hateful and
you caused injury. You robbed my fathers, fierce archers, of their kingdom. You acted in rage against those great-
souled ones. Because of all that, you are facing the consequences. O evil-minded one! You will reap the fruits of
terrible adharma. While all these soldiers look on, I will chastise you with my arrows today. Today, in the battle, I
will free myself of the debt of anger I bear towards you. Krishna is intolerant towards you and this is what my fathers also desire. O Kouravya! In the battle, I will free myself of the debt I owe to Bhima. If you do not give up the
battle, you will not escape with your life.' Having spoken these words, the mighty armed one, the destroyer of enemy heroes, released an arrow towards Duhshasana. It was like death, like the fire at the time of destruction and like
the wind in its energy. It swiftly approached and pierced him in his shoulder joint. He again pierced him with another twenty-five. O great king! Thus severely pierced and wounded, Duhshasana sat down on the floor of his
chariot. He was overcome by a great swoon. His charioteer quickly carried away the unconscious Duhshasana,
who was oppressed by the arrows of Subhadra's son, from the midst of that battle. On witnessing this, the Pandavas, Droupadi's sons, Virata, the Panchalas and the Kekayas roared like lions. The soldiers of the sons of Pandu
were delighted and in all directions, played on many different kinds of musical instruments. On witnessing the feat
accomplished by Subhadra's son, they laughed.

'"On seeing that the extremely hateful and insolent enemy had been vanquished, Droupadi's maharatha sons,
who had images of Dharma, Marut, Shakra and the Ashvins on the tips of their standards[These sons were respectively the sons of Yudhishthira (Dharma's son), Bhima (Marut's son), Arjuna (Shakra's
son) and Nakula and Sahadeva (the sons of the two Ashvins).], Satyaki, Chekitana,
Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, the Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu, the Matsyas, the Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the Pandavas, with Yudhishthira at the forefront, were filled with joy. Wishing to fragment Drona's array, they attacked
together. An extremely great battle commenced between those on your side and the enemy. The brave ones were
unwilling to retreat and desired victory. O great king! While that extremely fearful battle raged, Duryodhana spoke
to Radheya. 'Behold! Duhshasana has been conquered by the brave Abhimanyu. He[Duhshasana.] is like the sun in his energy
and was slaughtering the warriors in battle. The Pandavas are advancing towards Subhadra's son, with upraised
weapons.' At this, Karna became enraged. Wishing to ensure the welfare of your son, he covered the unassailable
Abhimanyu with sharp arrows. In the field of battle, he pierced his followers with sharp and supreme arrows and
was contemptuous of Subhadra's brave son. O king! Abhimanyu swiftly pierced Radheya with seventy-three arrows that possessed iron heads. The great-minded one wished to confront Drona. In that battle, there was no one
who could repulse his advance towards Drona. He oppressed the best of the rathas, like the one with the vajra[Vajra can loosely be translated as thunderbolt. Vajra is Indra's weapon and Indra is the wielder of the vajra.] in
his hand against the asuras. Karna was revered by all those who wielded the bow and desired victory. He exhibited
his supreme weapons and pierced Subhadra's son with hundreds of arrows. The powerful one was Rama's[Parashurama.] disciple and was supreme among those who possessed knowledge of weapons. In that battle, he oppressed Abhimanyu,
whom enemies found invincible. He was afflicted by Radheya's shower of weapons. But in that battle, Subhadra's
son did not waver. He was like an immortal. Arjuna's son used sharp, broad-headed and straight-tufted arrows that
had been sharpened on stone to sever the bows of the heroes and afflicted Karna. His standard and bow were severed and fell down on the ground. On seeing that Karna was confronting a hardship, Karna's younger brother
stretched his firm bow and quickly advanced against Subhadra's son. The Parthas, and those who followed them,
roared loudly. Satisfied with Subhadra's son, they played on musical instruments."'
