'Duryodhana said, "O unblemished one! Listen to me as I describe the large and varied tribute, full of riches, given
by the kings for the sake of the sacrifice. The kings who live along the banks of the river Shailoda, between
Mounts Meru and Mandara, and enjoy the pleasurable shade of bamboo[The text uses the expressions kichaka and venu. The latter is bamboo, while the former is hollow bamboo.]-the Khasas, Ekashanas, Jyohas,
Pradaras, Dirghavenus, Pashupas, Kunindas, Tanganas and Paratanganas brought large masses of pipilika gold in
vessels, gathered by ants[The ants dug up the gold from the earth. Pipilika is an ant. There is a reference in Herodotus to ants that dug
up gold in the desert regions.]. The strong residents of the mountains brought as tribute dark and coloured tails of
yaks and others that were as white as moonbeams, a lot of sweet honey from the flowers of the Himalayas, garlands and water from the northern Kuru region and immensely powerful herbs from northern Kailasa. They bowed
and stood at the gate of King Ajatashatru, but were denied entry. O lord of the earth! There were kings from the
other side of the Himalayas, from the mountains where the sun rises, from the banks of Varishena and Lohitya[The Brahmaputra.],
from the banks of the ocean and kiratas who live on roots and fruit and wear skins. They brought large masses of
sandal and aloe wood, kaliya[A specific type of sandalwood.], skins, jewels, gold, fragrances, ten thousand kirata slave girls, beautiful animals
and birds from distant regions and copious quantities of radiant gold from the mountains. But despite all this tribute, they were refused entry and waited at the gate.

'"O lord of the earth! Kayavyas, Daradas, Darvas, Shuras, Vaiyamakas, Oudumbaras, Durvibhagas, Paradas,
Bahlikas, Kashmiras, Kundamanas, Pourakas, Hamsakayanas, Shibis, Trigartas, Youdheyas, the kings of Madra
and Kekaya, Ambashthas, Koukuras, Tarkshyas, Vastrapas, Pahlavas[Identified as Persians.], Vasatas, Mouleyas, Kshudrakas, Malavas,
Shoundikas, Kukkuras, Shakas, Angas, Vangas, Pundras, Shanavatyas, Gayas, Sujatayas, Shrenimanas-all illustrious kshatriyas with weapons in their hands-brought hundreds of tribute for Ajatashatru. The chiefs from Vanga
and Kalinga, from Tamralipta and Pundraka, brought garments and silk from the Koushiki[A river.]. On the instructions
of the king, the gatekeepers told them, 'If you bring large and great tribute, only then will you be admitted.' So
they each gave one thousand elephants, with tusks like the shafts of ploughs, caparisoned in gold and covered in
cushions with the colour of lotuses. They were as large as mountains, always in rut and came from the shores of
Kamyaka Lake. They were covered in armour, patient and trained well. They[The kings.] then entered the gate. These and
many other masses came from all the directions. There were other great-souled ones who offered many gems. The
gandharva kin Chitraratha, Vasava's friend, gave four hundred horses with the speed of the wind. The gandharva
Tumburu happily gave one hundred horses that had the colour of mango leaves, with gold harnesses. O Kouravya!
O lord of the earth! The famous king of the Shukaras gave many hundreds of valuable elephants. As tribute, Virata
from Matsya gave two thousand rutting elephants, caparisoned in gold. O king! King Vasudana from the kingdom
of Pamshu gave twenty-six elephants and one thousand horses, all harnessed in gold. O lord of men! They had
great speed and strength and were of the right age. He offered this and many other riches to Pandava. O lord of the
earth! Yajnasena gave Pritha's sons fourteen thousand servant girls, ten thousand male servants with their wives
and twenty-six chariots pulled by elephants. He offered his entire kingdom for the sacrifice. The Simhalas offered
the best jewels found in the ocean, lapis lazuli, pearls and conch shells and hundreds of covers for housing elephants. Many dark-complexioned men, eyes copper-red and attired in garments adorned with gems, brought tribute
and waited at the gate, having been refused entry.

'"Brahmanas brought gifts out of affection, kshatriyas because they had been defeated and vaishyas and shudras
out of servitude. Out of affection and respect, they waited on Yudhishthira-all the mlecchas and all the varnas, the
superior, the middle and the inferior, arriving from many countries and many races. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! In Yudhishthira's abode, I saw the kings make such large and great offerings to my enemy that I wish to
die from grief. Now let me tell you about the servants of the Pandavas, to whom Yudhishthira supplies both raw
and cooked food. There are three hundred thousand soldiers mounted on elephants. There are a hundred million
chariots and innumerable foot soldiers. The raw food is measured out in one place, cooked elsewhere and distributed at another place. Auspicious sounds are heard. Among all the varnas, I have not seen a single one in Yudhishthira's abode who has not obtained food, is unhappy and has not been rewarded well. Eighty-eight thousand
snatakas live a householder's life, each supported by thirty servant girls provided by Yudhishthira. They are happy
and satisfied and always pray for the destruction of his enemies. In Yudhishthira's abode, ten thousand ascetics
who have controlled their seed, eat from golden plates. O lord of the earth! Yajnaseni[Yajnasena's daughter, Droupadi.] does not eat until she has
seen to it that everyone has eaten and is full, even hunchbacks and dwarfs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
There are only two who have not paid tribute to Kunti's son-the Panchalas because of the marriage alliance[Droupadi, the princess of Panchala, was married to the Pandavas.]
and the Andhakas and the Vrishnis because of friendship."'
