'Lomasha said, "O king! When Nriga sacrified there with soma and gratified Purandara, it has been heard that
he[Indra.] was extremely intoxicated. Here the gods, together with Indra and the Prajapatis, performed many different
kinds of great sacrifices and donated large amounts of stipends. At seven horse sacrifices, King Amurtarayasa satisfied the wielder of the vajra with soma here. At these seven sacrifices, everything was made of gold, though at
usual sacrifices, they are made of wood and clay. At these sacrifices of his, seven rituals became renowned. On
each of his sacrificial stakes, seven rings were established. O Yudhishthira! The gods themselves, together with Indra, erected radiant and golden stakes at his sacrifices. At the grand sacrifices of Gaya[Another name for Amurtarayasa.], the lord of the earth, Indra was intoxicated on soma and the brahmanas on stipends they received. The many grains of sand on this earth,
the many stars in the sky and the many drops in rain can never be counted. O great king! Like that, uncountable
were the riches that Gaya gave away to the sadasyas[Assisting priests.] at those seven sacrifices. Even if those objects can be
counted, it is impossible to count the stipends given by that giver of stipends. The golden cows were constructed
by Vishvakarma and he used these to gratify the brahmanas who assembled from many directions. O lord of the
earth! When the great-souled Gaya performed his sacrifices, the earth was covered everywhere with sacrificial
stakes and there was little space left for more. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He attained Indra's world
through his deeds. One who bathes in Payoshni goes to the world attained by him. O Indra among kings! O unblemished one! Therefore, together with your brothers, bathe here. O protector of the earth! You will be cleansed
of all sin."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Together with his brothers, the best of men bathed in Payoshni. Together with his brothers, the unblemished and energetic one went to Mount Vaidurya and the great river Narmada. O lord of the earth!
In each place, the illustrious rishi Lomasha recounted for him the names of all the beautiful tirthas. As it pleased
him and as it suited him, together with his brothers, he went to them one by one, donating riches in thousands to
the brahmanas.

'Lomasha said, "O Kounteya! On seeing Mount Vaidurya and descending into the Narmada, one attains the
world of the gods and that of the kings. O best of men! This is the union of treta and dvapara. O Kounteya! Once
one has reached this spot, one is cleansed of all sins. O son! This is the place of Sharyati's sacrifice, where the
Ashvins drank soma in person, with Koushika[Koushika is one of Indra's names.]. The immensely ascetic Bhargava, the lord Chyavana, was angry
with the great Indra and paralysed Vasava in his anger. He also obtained the princess Sukanya as his wife."

'Yudhishthira asked, "How did the illustrious one paralyse the chastiser of Paka? For what reason was the great
ascetic Bhargava angered? O brahmana! Why were the Nasatyas[The Ashvins.] made to become drinkers of soma? O illustrious one! Tell me all this exactly as it happened."'
