'Sanjaya said, "The powerful Dhananjaya was breathing like a snake that had been trodden on with the foot. He
raised his arrows. In that battle, he continuously used arrows to slice down the bows of those maharathas. In that
battle, he instantly sliced down the bows of those valiant kings. The great-souled one simultaneously pierced them
with arrows, wishing to slay those illustrious ones. O king! Some of those kings fell down on the ground, drenched
in blood. They were oppressed by Shakra's son. Their bodies were mangled and their heads fell down. Some died
because their armour and their bodies were penetrated. They were overcome by Partha's strength and resorted to
the ground. They assumed wonderful forms and were simultaneously destroyed. On seeing that those warriors and
princes had perished, the king of Trigarta quickly advanced towards Partha. Thirty-two charioteers, who were protecting from the rear, were also with him. They surrounded Partha and drew their bows with a loud noise. They
showered him with a great rain of arrows, like clouds pouring down rain on a mountain. In that encounter, Dhananjaya was oppressed by that shower of arrows and anger was engendered in him. He used sixty arrows that had been
washed in oil and killed the ones who had been protecting from the rear. Having vanquished the sixty rathas, the
illustrious Dhananjaya was delighted[There is an inconsistency between the number of thirty-two and sixty.]. Having killed the forces of those kings, Jishnu advanced to slay Bhishma. The king of Trigarta saw that the ranks of his maharatha relatives had been killed. He swiftly advanced to kill
Partha in battle, with the lords of the earth following him. On seeing that they were advancing against Dhananjaya,
foremost among the wielders of weapons, with Shikhandi at the forefront, they[The Pandava warriors.] advanced to protect Arjuna's
chariot. They raised sharp weapons in their hands. Partha also saw that those brave ones were advancing against
him, together with the king of Trigarta. In that battle, he pierced them with sharp arrows shot from the bow Gandi-
va. The skilled warrior wished to fight with Bhishma and saw Duryodhana and Saindhava and the other kings. For
a brief moment, the brave Jishnu used his strength to counter them. But then the infinitely valorous and greatly energetic one avoided those kings, Jayadratha and the other kings. With a bow and arrow in his hand, the spirited
one, terrible in his strength, went to where Gangeya was.

'"The great-souled Yudhishthira, terrible in his strength, also advanced swiftly, his anger having been excited. In
that encounter, he avoided the lord of Madra, whose deeds were infinite and who had been assigned as his
share[It had been agreed that Yudhishthira would kill Shalya.]. To do battle, with the sons of Madri and Bhimasena, he went to the spot where Bhishma, Shantanu's
son, was stationed. Ganga's son was wonderful in battle. He was set upon by all the maharathas together. But
Shantanu's great-souled son was not distracted. King Jayadratha was terrible in his valour and spirited. He was a
warrior who was unwavering in his aim. He advanced against those maharathas and sliced down their bows with
his supreme bow. The great-souled Duryodhana was overcome with the poison of anger. His wrath having been
ignited, he used arrows that were like fire to fight with Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, the twins and Partha. They were
also pierced with arrows shot by Kripa, Shalya, Shala and the lord Chitrasena and their[That of the Pandavas.] anger increased, like
the gods when they confronted the assembled daityas. Shikhandi's weapon had been sliced down by the king who
was Shantanu's son. On seeing that he was running away in that battle, the great-souled Ajatashatru became wrathful and spoke these words of anger to Shikhandi. 'You spoke these words to me, in the presence of your father.

"Using arrows that are clear and have the complexion of the sun, I will kill Bhishma, who is great in his vows. I
say this truthfully." This was the pledge you took and you are not making it come true. You are not killing Devavrata in battle. O brave one among men! You have become false in your oath. Protect your dharma and the fame
of your lineage. Behold. Bhishma is fighting with terrible force. He is tormenting the masses of my soldiers. The
net of his arrows is fierce in its energy. Like Death himself, he is killing everything in an instant. Your bow has
been sliced down by the king who is Shantanu's son. You have been vanquished and are running away from the
field of battle. You are abandoning your relatives and your brothers. Where are you going! This is not becoming of
you. Bhishma is infinite in his valour. On seeing him, our soldiers are routed and are fleeing. O Drupada's son! You
are certainly frightened. The complexion of your face is distressed. O brave one among men! Honouring his commands, Dhananjaya is engaged in this great battle. O brave one! You are famous on earth! Why are you now frightened of Bhishma?' Dharmaraja's words were harsh. But he heard them and perceived them to be full of sound reason. O king! Having honoured these instructions, the great-souled one swiftly set about the task of killing
Bhishma.

'"Shikhandi advanced towards Bhishma with great force. Shalya countered him with weapons that were terrible
and extremely difficult to resist. O king! However, Drupada's son was like Indra in his power. He saw those
weapons, which were as powerful as the fire at the destruction of a yuga, and was not confounded at all. The great
archer countered those weapons with his own arrows. To counter them, Shikhandi took up another terrible weapon
known as Varuna. The gods stationed in the firmament and the sky saw those weapons[Shalya's weapons.] repulsed by this
weapon. O king! In that battle, the great-souled and brave Bhishma sliced down the bow and colourful standard of
Pandu's son, King Yudhishthira Ajamidha. On seeing that Yudhishthira was overcome with fear and had cast aside
his bow and arrows in that battle, Bhimasena grabbed a club and advanced on foot against Jayadratha. On seeing
Bhimasena advance with great speed with the club, Jayadratha pierced him from every direction with five hundred
sharp and terrible arrows that were like Yama's staff. But the swift Vrikodara, his heart full of rage, paid no attention to these arrows. In that battle, he slew the mounts which bore the king of Sindhu in that encounter, ones that
had been born in Aratta. 295 Your son[Later sentences identify this son as Chitrasena.] was unrivalled in his prowess and was like the king of the gods. On seeing Bhimasena, he swiftly advanced on his chariot to kill him, with his weapons raised. Bhima suddenly roared.
Uttering threats, he rushed towards him with a club. In every direction, the Kurus saw this upraised club, like
Yama's staff. All of them wished to avoid the descent of the terrible club and abandoned your son. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! There was a tumultuous and extremely terrible melee and they were all confounded. But despite seeing the great club descend, Chitrasena did not lose his senses. He discarded his chariot and resorted to
fighting on foot, grasping a polished sword and shield. He leapt down, like a lion from the peak of a mountain, and
resorted to the face of the earth. In that battle, the club descended on the colourful chariot and killed the horses and
the charioteer. It then fell down on the ground, like a flaming and giant meteor that has been dislodged from the
sky and has fallen down. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing the extraordinary, extremely great
and unrivalled feat accomplished by your son[Of avoiding the club.], all the soldiers were delighted and honoured him. They uttered a
roar in every direction."'
