'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Those brave ones were driven by enmity towards each other. They retired to their respective camps, drenched in blood. Having rested for some time, they honoured each other in accordance with the
proper forms. They were then seen armoured again, desiring to do battle. O king! Your son was overwhelmed with
anxiety and blood was trickling from his limbs. He told the grandfather, 'Our soldiers are terrible and fierce. They
are arrayed and bear many standards. But the brave Pandava rathas have swiftly shattered, slain and oppressed us.
Having confounded all our warriors, they have obtained fame. The makara vyuha was like the vajra. But Bhima
penetrated it and wounded me with arrows that were like the staff of death. O king! On seeing him enraged, I was
overcome with fear and lost my senses. I cannot find peace even now. You are truthful in your vows. Through your
favours, I wish to obtain victory and slay the Pandavas.' When he was thus addressed, Ganga's great-souled son,
foremost among the wielders of weapons, knew that Duryodhana was overcome by grief. Though his mind was
distracted, the intelligent one replied, 'O prince! I will make supreme efforts to penetrate their army, as much as I
can. I wish to grant you victory and joy. But I will not hide anything for your sake. These maharathas are terrible
and many. There are illustrious and supreme among brave ones. They are skilled in the use of weapons. They have
become the aides of the Pandavas in battle. They have overcome fatigue and they are vomiting the venom of their
wrath. Those brave ones are firm in their enmity towards you. They are incapable of being vanquished easily. O
king! O brave one! But for your sake, I will strive against them to the best of my ability, giving up my life. O highminded one! In this battle, for your sake, I will no longer attempt to remain alive today. For your sake, I will take
on the gods, the daityas and all the worlds, not to speak of the enemies here. O king! To bring you pleasure, I will
fight with the Pandavas and do everything that you desire.' On hearing these words, Duryodhana was supremely
content and delighted.

'"He cheerfully instructed all the soldiers and all the kings to advance. On hearing his instructions, the chariots,
horses, infantry and elephants began to advance. O king! They were happy and were armed with a large number
and many kinds of weapons. O king! With elephants, horses and infantry, your army was extremely resplendent.
There were masses of tuskers, stationed in arrays and commanded well. The warriors, gods among men and skilled
in the use of weapons, stationed themselves amidst the masses of soldiers. The arrays of chariots, infantry, elephants and horses advanced, proceeding along the proper formations. They raised a dust that was tinged like the
morning sun and shrouded the sun's rays. There were bright standards on chariots and elephants. In every direction, they fluttered in the air. O king! In that battle, their different colours looked like clouds tinged with lightning
in the sky. The kings twanged their bows and a tumultuous and terrible sound arose. This was like the roar of the
ocean, when it was churned by the gods and the great asuras in the first yuga[The first yuga means satya or krita yuga.]. With that great roar and with
many forms and colours, the army of yoru sons was greatly agitated. The soldiers were ready to kill the soldiers of
the enemy and looked like masses of clouds at the end of a yuga."'
