Vaishampayana said, 'On reaching the shami tree, Partha told Virata's son, whom he knew to be extremely delicate
and not experienced in battle, "O Uttara! Instructed by me, swiftly fetch my bows. Yours will not be able to withstand my strength, or bear great pressure, or strike down an elephant, or sustain the force of my arms when I defeat
the enemies. O Bhuminjaya! Therefore, quickly climb this shami tree that is covered with foliage. The bows of the
sons of Pandu are hidden there-Yudhishthira, Bhima, Bibhatsu and the twins, as well as the flags, the arrows and
the divine armour of those brave ones. There is also Partha's extremely mighty bow, Gandiva. This is capable of
extending the kingdom and is alone the equal of one hundred thousand others. It is capable of withstanding exertions. It is as large as the king of grass[Trinaraja, the king (raja) of grass (trina). Coconut, bamboo, sugarcane and palmyra are all variously referred to
as the king of grass.]. It is the equal of all weapons and creates destruction among enemies. It is
embellished with gold, divine, smooth, broad and without any blemishes. It can withstand heavy pressure. It is terrible and beautiful to look at. All the other bows are equally powerful and firm." Uttara replied, "It has been heard
that a corpse is tied to this tree. I am a prince. How can I touch it with my hands? I have been born in the kshatriya
lineage and that does not befit me. I am a great prince who knows about mantras and sacrifices. O Brihannada! If I
touch it, my body will become as polluted as that of a bearer of corpses. How can you ask me to touch it and become the subject of condemnation?" Brihannada said, "O Indra among kings! You may become the subject of condemnation, but you will remain clean. Do not be frightened. There are bows here and no corpses. You are spirited
and have been born as the heir to the Matsya lineage. O son of a king! Why should I ask you to perform a reprehensible act?" Thus addressed by Partha, Virata's son, adorned in earrings, descended from the chariot and reluctantly climbed the shami tree.

'Dhananjaya, the destroyer of enemies, remained on the chariot and instructed him from there. "Remove the
covers quickly." He removed the covers from every side and saw Gandiva and the other four bows. Having been
freed, the bows were as resplendent as the rays of the sun. A divine radiance glowed, like the planets at the time of
their risings. On seeing their forms, like sighing snakes, his body hair stood up and he was terrified for an instant.
He then touched those radiant and giant bows. O king! Virata's son spoke these words to Arjuna.

'Uttara asked, "This supreme bow is worth a thousand crores of gold. It is embossed with one hundred golden
eyes. Whom does it belong to? This supreme bow has excellent sides and is easy to hold. Its back shines with golden and tusked elephants. Whom does it belong to? The back of this supreme bow is embellished with sixty fireflies
set in patterns made out of pure gold. Whom does it belong to? This supreme bow is dazzling in its lustre. The rays
of three golden suns decorate it. Whom does it belong to? This supreme bow is adorned with gold and jewels and
is decorated with golden locusts made out of pure gold. Whom does it belong to? These one thousand iron arrows
are borne by feathers. They have gold and silver tips and are in golden quivers. Whom do they belong to? These
large arrows are broad. They have the feathers of vultures and have been sharpened on stone. These arrows are
completely made out of iron and are yellow, like the colour of turmeric. They have excellent tips. Whom do they
belong to? This black quiver has the marks of five tigers and the ears of sows. It holds ten arrows. Whom does it
belong to? These seven hundred arrows wish to drink blood. They are large and long and are entirely made out of
copper. Whom do they belong to? These arrows have the feathers of parrots and the lower halves are well made.
The upper halves are made of iron and have yellow embellishments made of gold. They have been sharpened on
stone. Whom do these belong to? This long sword has a stone at the tip and stones at the back. It is in a large and
excellent scabbard made out of tiger skin, decorated in golden patterns and tinkling with bells. Whom does this
large sword belong to? This divine sword is without blemishes and has a golden hilt. Whom does it belong to?
This unblemished sword is in a scabbard made out of cow skin. Whom does it belong to? It has been made out of
gold in the country of the nishadhas and is capable of bearing a great weight. This sword with a golden hilt is in a
scabbard made out of the skin of an animal with five nails[The text translates as an animal with five nails. Specifically, it could be a tiger, a lion, an elephant, a turtle, or
any other such animal.]. It is excellent in form and is yellow like the sky.
Whom does it belong to? This yellow and heavy sword is in a golden scabbard that is made out of molten gold and
has the complexion of the fire. It is supreme and without blemishes. Whom does it belong to? O Brihannada! I am
asking you. Tell me exactly. I have become overcome with great and extreme wonder at witnessing all these
things."

'Brihannada said, "The one you have asked about first is Partha's bow Gandiva, famous in the worlds and capable of destroying enemy armies. It is supreme among all weapons and is embellished with pure gold. This is Arjuna's supreme weapon. It is equal to one hundred thousand others and is the extender of kingdoms. Using this,
Partha defeated gods and men in battle. For eternity, gods, danavas and gandharvas have worshipped it. Brahma
held it earlier, for one thousand years. Then Prajapati held it for five hundred and three years[Prajapati means the lord of all beings. Since Brahma has been separately mentioned, it is not clear who is meant
here. The known transition of the Gandiva is from Soma (the moon god) to Varuna, from Varuna to Agni and from
Agni to Arjuna.], Shakra for eighty-
five, King Soma for five hundred and Varuna for a hundred years. Partha, borne by white steeds, has possessed it
for sixty-five years. This supreme bow is extremely powerful and greatly divine. It is supreme in its resplendent
form and is honoured by gods and mortals. That bow, with the golden grip and excellent sides, is Bhimasena's.
Using this, Partha[Partha means Pritha's (Kunti's) son and Bhimasena is also Partha.], the scorcher of enemies, conquered the entire eastern direction. O son of Virata! This supreme
bow, with the handsome grip and decorated with fireflies, belongs to King Yudhishthira. The one on which radiant
and golden suns blaze, resplendent with energy, is Nakula's weapon. The one that is embellished with golden locusts is the bow of Madri's son, Sahadeva. O son of Virata! These thousand arrows are as sharp as razors and are
feathered. These arrows are like the venom of snakes and belong to Arjuna. Their energy blazes in battle and they
are swift. When the warrior unleashes them in battle against enemies, they are not exhausted. These sharp arrows
destroy enemies and belong to Bhima. They are broad and long and have the form of crescent moons. These arrows are yellow and have golden shafts and belong to Nakula. They have been sharpened on stone and are in a
quiver that has the marks of five tigers. With this quiver, Madri's intelligent son conquered the entire western direction in battle. These arrows that are as radiant as the sun and are throughout made of iron, belong to the intelligent Sahadeva. They are decorated and are capable of performing action. These great arrows are sharp, yellow,
long-shafted and broad and belong to the king[Yudhishthira.]. They have golden tufts and three joints. This long sword has the
mark of a bee in the front and at the rear. It is firm and is capable of withstanding great burdens. It was used by Arjuna in battle. This extremely large sword has a sheath that is made of tiger skin and belongs to Bhimasena. It is
divine and is capable of withstanding great burdens. It causes terror among enemies. This supreme sword has a
golden hilt and belongs to the intelligent Kourava Dharmaraja. It has an excellent blade and quiver. This firm
sword is capable of withstanding great burdens and belongs to Nakula. It is colourful and is in a sheath made out
of the skin of an animal with five nails[The text translates as an animal with five nails. Specifically, it could be a tiger, a lion, an elephant, a turtle, or
any other such animal.]. This giant sword is in a sheath that is made out of the skin of a cow and
belongs to Sahadeva. It is firm and is capable of withstanding all burdens."'
