'Markandeya said, "The king reflected about the objectives behind the bestowal of his daughter and began to make
all the arrangements for the marriage. On an auspicious lunar day, he invited all the brahmanas, all the officiating
priests[Ritvijas, officiating priests at sacrifices.] and all the priests, and set out with his daughter. The king went to Dyumatsena's hermitage in the sacred
forest, and accompanied by the brahmanas, approached the rajarshi on foot. He saw the immensely fortunate and
blind king seated there, on a mat of kusha grass, under a shala tree. In accordance with what is prescribed, the king
worshipped the rajarshi and introduced himself with a few restrained words. The king who was learned in dharma
offered the king[Dyumatsena and Ashvapati respectively.] an arghya[Gift given to a guest.], a seat and a cow, and asked him why he had come. He[Ashvapati.] then told him everything about his wishes and intended course of action and about Satyavan. Ashvapati said, 'O rajarshi! This is my
beautiful daughter, named Savitri. O one learned in dharma! In accordance with your own dharma, accept her as
your daughter-in-law.' Dyumatsena replied, 'Dislodged from our kingdom, we have resorted to living in the
woods. We are controlled and practise the dharma of ascetics. Your daughter does not deserve a state of living in
the forest. How will she be able to bear that hardship?' Ashavapati said, 'Both My daughter and I know that happiness and unhappiness may exist or they may not exist[That is, neither is permanent.]. Therefore, you should not utter such words to someone
like me. O king! I have come here after making up my mind. I have honoured you affectionately as a well-wisher
and you should not kill my hopes. Since I have come here out of love, you should not refuse me. In this alliance,
you are my equal and I am yours. Therefore, accept my daughter as your daughter-in-law and as Satyavan's wife.'

Dyumatsena replied, 'Earlier, I had desired to have an alliance with you. But dislodged from my kingdom, I did
not think about it again. Let my cherished desire be accomplished today itself. You are a guest that I have wished
for.' Then the two kings summoned all the brahmanas who lived in the hermitage and in accordance with the rites,
arranged for the wedding.

'"Having given his daughter away in the appropriate fashion[The word used is arha and it is possible to interpret this as a dowry.], with garments, Ashvapati happily returned to
his own house. Having obtained a wife who possessed all the good qualities, Satyavan was delighted. She was also
happy at having obtained the husband her heart had wanted. When her father had departed, she gave up all her ornaments. She donned bark and garments that were red[Red or ochre garments are worn by ascetics.]. Through her servitude, qualities, affection and self-control and attending to all the wishes, she satisfied everyone. By tending to her body and all her garments and other
objects, she satisfied her mother-in-law. Through her restrained words and worship of the gods, she satisfied her
father-in-law. In a similar way, through her pleasant words, skilfulness, equanimity and tending to him in private,
she satisfied her husband. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those virtuous ones lived in that hermitage for
some time and performed austerities. But whether lying down or standing, during day and at night, in her mind,
Savitri kept thinking about the words that Narada had spoken."'
