'Bhishma said, "O supreme among the Bharata lineage! When I encountered Rama the next day, there was again a
terrible and tumultuous battle. From one day to the next, the brave lord, who has dharma in his soul and knows
about the use of divine weapons, released many celestial weapons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But, in
that terrible battle where one is ready to give up one's precious life, I repulsed them with weapons that could be
used for countering. When many weapons were thus destroyed, the immensely energetic Bhargava became wrathful. He fought, ready to give up his own life. Having been restrained by weapons, Jamadagni's great-souled son
grasped a spear that was terrible in form. It was like a flaming meteor that had been created by time itself. It blazed
at the tip and covered the world with its energy. It flamed towards me, like the sun at the time of destruction. With
my fiery arrows, I sliced it into three and it fell down on the ground. At that, a breeze with a sacred fragrance began to blow. When this was sliced down, Rama's anger was ignited. He hurled twelve other terrible spears at me.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am incapable of describing their forms, their energy and their speed. But I
watched them in confusion. They advanced from all the directions, like giant meteors, or the fire. They had many
forms and energy and flamed at the tips. They were like twelve suns, at the time of the destruction of the world. O
king! When I saw that net of arrows[The text says arrows, though Parashurama actually hurled twelve spears.] extending, I sliced them down with my net of arrows. In that battle, I shot
twelve arrows and countered those spears, terrible in form. Jamadagni's great-souled son then hurled another terrible spear at me. It possessed a golden shaft and was colourful, with a golden tassel. It was like a giant meteor and
was flaming. O Indra among men! I repulsed it with my sword and shield and it fell down. In that battle, I used divine arrows against Jamadagni's son and showered his celestial horses and his charioteer. On seeing that his
colourful spear, which had the form of an unleashed snake, had been repelled, the great-souled one, the oppressor
of the Haihaya[Kartavirya Arjuna was the king of Haihaya.], was overcome by anger and grasped a divine weapon. A mass of flaming arrows, without
tufts[The word used is vishikha, a special type of arrow. Vishikhas were minute arrows, without feathered tufts.], manifested itself, like a terrible swarm of locusts. They pierced and completely overwhelmed my body, my
horses, my chariot and my charioteer. My chariot was covered everywhere with those arrows. O king! And so were
my mounts and my charioteer. The yoke of the chariot, the wheels and the axle were shattered through those arrows. When that shower of arrows was exhausted, I also showered arrows on my preceptor in return. Bhargava's
body, and his mass of brahmana energy, were pierced by those arrows and began to discharge a lot of blood. Rama
was tormented by my net of arrows. I was also suffering from many deep wounds. When the sun headed for the
mountain behind which it sets, the fighting ended in the afternoon."'
