'"The lord said, 'You are not a detractor. 330 I will tell you this extremely secret knowledge with self-realization.
331 Knowing this, you will be freed from all evil. This is extremely secret and the king of knowledge. 332 It is the
best, pure, leads to direct and eternal results, is sanctioned by dharma and is easy to practise. O scorcher of foes!
People who show disrespect to this dharma don't attain me and traverse the path of death and this world. This entire universe is pervaded by me in my unmanifest form. All beings are established in me. But I am not established
in them. Witness my divine yoga. Again, the beings are not established in me. 333 My atman holds up the beings
and sustains the beings, but I am not established in the beings. Know that like the great wind, which goes everywhere, and is always established in the sky, all beings are established in me. O Kounteya! At the time of destruction, 334 all beings are dissolved in my nature and at the time of creation, I create them. I keep my nature under
control and repeatedly create these many beings, helpless according to their own nature. 335 O Dhananjaya! But I
am unattached to those acts and am established in indifference. Those acts cannot tie me down. O Kounteya! Because of my lordship, nature gives birth to this universe with its moveable and immovable objects. Because of this,
the universe is repeatedly created. 336 The ignorant do not know my supreme nature as the great lord of all beings.
They show disrespect to me as someone who has adopted a human form. Their desire is fruitless, their action is
fruitless, their knowledge is fruitless, their minds waver and their deluded nature is ruled by demonic qualities. 337
O Partha! But those great souls who seek refuge in divine qualities are unwavering in their minds and worship me,
knowing me to be the indestructible origin of all beings. Careful and firm in their rites, they 338 faithfully offer
obeisance and always sing my praise, always focused on worshipping me. Some worship me through the yajna that
is the path of knowledge. Some worship me as one, others as separate. 339 Worshipping as one means regarding
the worshipper and the worshipped as identical. This can be called the I, who pervade the universe, am worshipped
in many forms. I am kratu, I am yajna, I am svadha, 340 I am the herbs, I am the mantra, I indeed am the clarified
butter, I am the fire, I am the offering. I am the father, mother, grandfather and sustainer of this universe. I am all
that is pure and is to be known. I am the Om syllable. I am also the Rik, Saman and Yajus. 341 I am the goal, the
sustainer, the controller, the witness, the abode, the sanctuary, the well-doer, the creator, the destroyer, the preserver, the repository and the indestructible seed. 342 O Arjuna! I provide heat. I attract the water and rain it down
again. I am immortality and death. I am the eternal and the transient. 343 Those who know the three arts 344 worship me through yajnas, drink the soma juice and purified of sins, wish to attain heaven. They attain sanctified
heaven 345 and in heaven, enjoy the celestial objects enjoyed by the gods. Having enjoyed the greatness of heaven, when their good deeds are exhausted, they enter the mortal earth. In this way, the practitioners of the three
dharmas, 346 followers of desire, go back and forth. Those who worship me, minds focused on me alone and always immersed in me, I preserve for them what has been attained and what is yet to be attained. 347 O Kounteya!
Those with devotion who faithfully worship other gods, they too, worship me alone. But not in the indicated way.
Because I alone am the receiver of offerings and the granter of fruits at all yajnas. But they do not know my true
nature and therefore, are cast down. 348 Those who worship the gods attain the gods. Those who worship the ancestors attain the ancestors. 349 Those who worship the elements 350 attain the elements. And mine 351 attain me.
He who faithfully worships me with a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water, from that pure-hearted person, I gladly accept
those faithful offerings. O Kounteya! Whatever you do, whatever you partake, whatever you offer, whatever you
donate, whatever you meditate, offer that to me. In this way, you will be freed from the bondage of the fruits of
righteous and evil action. With your self in the yoga of sannyasa, 352 freed, you will attain me. I am the same to
all beings. I have no one I hate, nor anyone I love. But those who worship me with devotion, they are established
in me. And I am established in them. Even if the most evil of persons worships me single-mindedly, he should be
thought of as a righteous person. Because his resolve is correct. Swiftly, he 353 becomes a righteous person and
attains eternal peace. O Kounteya! My worshippers are never destroyed. This you can vouch for. O Partha! Even
those who are of evil birth, women, vaishyas and shudras, 354 having sought refuge in me, they will certainly attain supreme liberation. There is no need to repeat 355 about pure brahmanas and devoted rajarshis. This earth is
temporary and leads to unhappiness. Therefore, having attained, 356 worship me. With mind immersed in me, become my devotee, my worshipper and one who offers obeisance to me. In this way, with your atman united in me
as the refuge, you will attain me alone.'"'
