'Brihadashva said, "Having heard these words of Sudeva, Rituparna, lord of men, spoke these words to Bahuka, in
a comforting and soft voice, 'O Bahuka! I wish to go to Vidarbha for Damayanti's svayamvara. You are skilled
with horses. Do you think that it can be done in a single day?' O Kounteya! Having heard these words from the
king, Nala's mind was rent asunder with grief and the great-minded one was tormented with sorrow. He thought,
'If Damayanti has decided to do something like this, she must be demented with grief. Or is it that she has thought
of a great means for my sake? Why has the ascetic daughter of Vidarbha decided to perform this cruel act? I am
mean and deceitful and my intelligence has been deluded by sin. In this world, feminine nature is fickle. My sin
was also terrible. So must it then be. But will she act in this way and forget all her love? That slender-waisted one
is anxious for my sake and is despairing. But she can never act in this way, especially because she has children. It
is certain that we have to go there and truly find out what is happening. I will accomplish Rituparna's desires, because that is what I want too.' Bahuka decided this in his mind. In a dejected state of mind, he went to King Rituparna. He joined his hands in salutation and said, 'O tiger among men! O lord of men! I give you my word that we
will reach the city of Vidarbha in a single day.' O king! Having obtained King Bhangasvari's orders, Bahuka went
to the stables and inspected the horses.

'"Bahuka was repeatedly rushed by Rituparna. He then selected horses that were lean, but capable on the road.
They were energetic and strong. They had been born in a noble lineage and were good in conduct. They were
bereft of all inauspicious marks. Their nostrils were wide and their jaws were big. They were pure and possessed
the ten locks of hair[Avarta, an auspicious lock of hair on the back of a horse, curling backwards.]. They were from the region of the Sindhu and were as swift as the wind. On seeing them,
the king was a little angry and said, 'What do you wish to do? You should not jest with me. How can these horses
of mine, weak and lifeless, bear us? How can we travel such a long distance with these steeds?' Bahuka replied,
'There is no doubt that these horses will reach Vidarbha. O king! But if you so desire, tell me which ones you
would like me to yoke.' Rituparna said, 'O Bahuka! You are the one who has knowledge of horses. You are the
skilled one. Yoke the ones that you think will be swift and capable.' Then the skilled Nala yoked four horses to the
chariot. They were bred from a noble lineage and were of good conduct. Then the king swiftly ascended the chariot that had been yoked, as the supreme horses knelt down on the ground.

'"O lord of the earth! Then the handsome King Nala, supreme among men, comforted the horses, which were
endowed with energy and strength. Nala controlled the reins and made suta Varshneya ascend the chariot. Then
those supreme horses were commanded by Bahuka in accordance with the rules. The chariot seemed to rise up into
the sky, confounding the occupants. The wise king of Ayodhya was extremely surprised when he saw those horses
carry them with the speed of the wind. Having heard the roar of the chariot and the control over the horses, Varshneya began to wonder about Bahuka's mastery over horses, 'Is this Matali, the charioteer of the king of the gods?
Those great signs can be seen in the brave Bahuka. Or is this Shalihotra[A famous authority who wrote about horses.], who knows about the breeding of
horses? Has he now assumed this beautiful human form[This is strange, because Bahuka is deformed.]? Or might it be King Nala, the destroyer of enemy
cities? Has that king come here[Since Varshneya is Nala's old charioteer, he knows Nala well. The only difficulty is that Nala's form is now
different.]?' He began to think in this way, 'Or perhaps Bahuka knows some of the
knowledge that Nala possessed. The skills of Bahuka and Nala seem to be the same. Then again, his age seems to
be the same as Nala's. This is not the immensely valorous Nala, but he has the same knowledge. Sometimes, great-
souled ones roam the world in disguise, driven by destiny, or malformed because of what has been said in the sacred texts. My mind is divided because of the deformity of his body. But it is my view that I should not decide in
the absence of proof. They are equal in age. It is the form alone that is the difficulty. But then again, Bahuka has all
the qualities and I think that he is Nala.' O great king! Punyashloka's old charioteer kept on thinking in his mind.
O Indra among kings! Together with the charioteer Varshneya, King Rituparna also kept thinking about Bahuka's
expertise with horses. He was extremely delighted on witnessing his strength, valour, enthusiasm, control over
horses and diligence."'
