Vaishampayana said, 'Together with Soubala, Karna heard these words of Dhritarasthra. At an appropriate time, he
spoke thus to Duryodhana. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have exiled the brave Pandavas through
your own valour. You now enjoy the earth alone, like the killer of Shambara in heaven[Indra killed a demon named Shambara.]. O lord of men! O king!
All the kings of the east, south, west and north pay tribute to you. The blazing Lakshmi used to serve the Pandavas
earlier. O king! But with your brothers, you have now won her. O king! The blazing prosperity that we earlier saw,
for a short time, with Yudhishthira in Indraprastha, is now with you and he is oppressed by sorrow. O king! You
have snatched it from Yudhishthira with your intelligence and strength. O mighty-armed one! That radiance is seen
to be with you now. O Indra among kings! O slayer of enemy warriors! All the kings are now established under
your suzerainty and ask you what they should do. O king! The entire goddess earth is yours now-with the ocean
as a garment, with mountains and forests, with villages, cities and mines, with many groves and countries, and
adorned with habitations. O king! The brahmanas praise you and you are worshipped by the kings for your manliness. You shine among them, like the one with the rays[The sun.] among the gods in heaven. O king! Surrounded by the
Kurus, you shine like King Yama amidst the Rudras, Maruts and Vasava[Indra.], like the king of the nakshatras[The moon is the king of the nakshatras.]. Let
us go and see the Pandavas, residing in the forest and bereft of prosperity. They always slighted you and never
showed you respect. O great king! It is said that the Pandavas reside, together with the forest-dwelling brahmanas,
near Lake Dvaitavana. O great king! Go there with your supreme prosperity and torment the sons of Pandu with
your energy, like the sun. You are established in your kingdom and they have been dislodged from their kingdom.
You have wealth and they are deprived of wealth. They are without prosperity and you are full of prosperity. O
king! Go and see the sons of Pandu. Let the Pandavas behold you like Nahusha's son Yayati, with great splendour
and established in great fortune. O lord of the earth! This prosperity, that well-wishers and ill-wishers see in a radiant man, is considered to be real power. Like a man who stands on a mountain and looks down on earth, what happiness can there be that is greater than being on plain ground while one's foes are on uneven terrain? O tiger
among kings! The birth of a son or the obtaining of a kingdom does not bring as much bliss as seeing one's enemies in misery. What happiness will there not be, on being successful oneself, and on seeing Dhananjaya attired in
bark and skins? Let your wives, attired in excellent garments, see the miserable Krishna, attired in bark and skins,
and thereby increase her grief. Bereft of riches, let her criticize her own self and her life. She felt grief in the midst
of the assembly hall. But on seeing your wives adorned in ornaments, the grief will be greater." O Janamejaya!
Thus did Karna and Shakuni speak to the kings[The plural is used, meaning Duryodhana and his brothers.], and having spoken, they fell silent.'
