Vaishampayana said, 'When Dhritarashtra, lord of men, heard Krishna's words, he quickly spoke to Vidura,
learned in all manner of dharma. "O son[The word used is tata.]! Go and bring the immensely wise and far-sighted Gandhari here. Together with her, I will be able to persuade the evil-minded one. If she can pacify that evil-souled and evil-minded
one, we will be able to abide by the words of our well-wisher, Krishna. She might be able to show the path to the
one who has been overtaken by avarice. He has evil intentions and evil aides. With her words, she may prove capable. If she can avert this great and terrible calamity brought on by Duryodhana, we will be saved and obtain peace,
achieving for eternity what we wish to obtain and protecting that we possess[Yoga and kshema respectively.]." On hearing the king's words and
following Dhritarashtra's instructions, Vidura brought the far-sighted Gandhari. Dhritarashtra said, "O Gandhari!
This evil-minded son of yours does not follow my instructions. Because of his greed for prosperity, he is sporting
with his riches and his life. That wicked one is evil in his conduct and evil-souled. Ignoring his well-wishers, that
foolish one has disrespectfully left the assembly hall." On hearing her husband's words, the famous princess Gand-
hari spoke these words, with the greatest welfare of everyone in mind. "Swiftly summon the son who is afflicted
with a desire for the kingdom. The kingdom cannot be ruled by a person who seeks to destroy dharma and artha. O
Dhritarashtra! But you yourself are to be greatly blamed for this. You knew that he was wicked. But out of affection for your son, you followed his intentions. He is obsessed with desire and anger. He is greedy and overcome by
confusion. O king! He is incapable of being restrained through force. Dhritarashtra is reaping the fruits of giving
the kingdom to a stupid, evil-souled and greedy one, who has evil aides. How can an immensely wise one overlook
dissension amongst one's own relatives? When you have separated from your own relatives, your enemies will
overcome you. O great king! If a difficulty can be averted through conciliation and gifts, why should one bring
down a staff on one's own relatives?" At these words of the mother and on Dhritarashtra's instructions, Kshatta
again brought the intolerant Duryodhana to the assembly hall.

'Wishing to hear what his mother had to say, he again entered the assembly hall. He sighed like a serpent in his
anger and his eyes were copper-red. On seeing her deviant son enter, Gandhari censured him and spoke these appropriate words. "O Duryodhana! O son! Listen to my words, for the welfare and happiness of you and your relatives. If you resort to peace, you will honour Bhishma, your father and me, and also the other well-wishers, with
Drona at the forefront. O immensely wise one! O bull among the Bharatas! A kingdom cannot be obtained, protected or enjoyed through one's own desires alone. Without controlling one's senses, one cannot retain a kingdom
for a long time. One who is intelligent and has controlled one's soul, can protect a kingdom. Desire and anger draw
a man away from success. A king conquers the earth after subjugating these two enemies. It is great to be a lord
and master of the world. An evil-souled one may obtain the kingdom and that status, but cannot retain it for long.
One who aspires for greatness must subject his senses to dharma and artha. With the senses under control, the intelligence increases, like a fire with kindling. If they are not under control, they can lead to destruction, like an unskilled charioteer and uncontrolled horses on the road. If one wishes to control one's advisers without controlling
one's own soul, with both one's own self and one's advisers out of control, one is subjugated. He who first controls
his own soul, like conquering a country, then becomes successful in conquering his advisers and his enemies. Prosperity descends on a person who controls his senses, conquers his advisers, holds up the staff against delinquents,
acts after deliberation and is steadfast. Desire and anger in the body destroy wisdom and are like two fish caught in
a fine-meshed net. If desire and anger increase, the gods are scared of discord, and bar the gates to heaven to such a
person if he travels there. A king who knows how to completely control desire, anger, avarice, insolence and pride,
conquers the earth. If a king wishes for dharma and artha and defeat of the enemies, he must always devote himself
to controlling his senses. He who is overcome by desire and anger and acts falsely towards his own, or those of
others, will have no aides. They are brave, immensely wise and are the destroyers of enemies. O son! Having united with those Pandavas, you will happily enjoy the earth. O son! It is indeed as Bhishma, Shantanu's son, and maharatha Drona have told you. Krishna and the Pandavas are invincible. Seek refuge with the mighty-armed
Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied. Keshava will be delighted at the happiness of both sides. A man, who does not
follow the instructions of wise and learned well-wishers who desire his welfare, causes delight to his enemies. O
son! There can be no welfare from a war, nor dharma and artha. How can there be happiness? Nor can there be
eternal victory. Do not set your mind on war. O immensely wise one! O destroyer of enemies! Bhishma, your father and Bahlika gave Pandu's sons a part of the kingdom out of fear of dissension. You can see the fruits of that
gift, since you now enjoy the entire earth, with those brave ones having killed the thorns[Of enemies.]. O destroyer of enemies! Give the sons of Pandu what is due to them, if you and your advisers wish to enjoy the remaing half of the
kings[That is, the remaining half of the kingdom and the tributes of those kings.]. Half of the earth is sufficient for you and your advisers to sustain yourselves. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By adhering to the advice of your well-wishers, you will attain fame. The Pandavas are prosperous.
They have controlled their souls. They are intelligent. They have mastered their senses. O son! By engaging in a
war with them, your great happiness will be destroyed. Control the wrath of your well-wishers. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! After giving the sons of Pandu their own rightful share, rule over the kingdom. The hardship that
they have suffered for thirteen years is enough. O immensely wise one! Pacify the sentiments of desire and anger.
The son of the suta[Karna.] is firm in his anger and so is your brother, Duhshasana. They desire success, but are incapable of standing up to the Parthas. If Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Bhimasena, Dhananjaya and Dhrishtadyumna are enraged, it is certain that all the subjects will be destroyed. O son! Because you are overcome by intolerance, do not destroy the Kurus. The entire earth is touched by this, either on your side, or that of the Pandavas. If
you foolishly think that Bhishma, Drona and Kripa and the others will fight with all their strength, this is not going
to happen. They know their own selves. In kingship affection and status, they regard you and the Pandavas equally.
And dharma transcends everything. Even if they lay down their lives, scared that the king will no longer give them
a stipend, they will not be able to look King Yudhishthira in the face. It is not seen that men obtain artha out of
avarice. O son! O bull among the Bharatas! Therefore, control your greed and be pacified."'
