Vaishampayana said, 'On his way to King Virata, who was seated in his assembly hall, Yudhishthira first fastened
the dice, made of lapis lazuli and gold, to his side and gathered his garments around him. The immensely famous
lord of men, extender of the Kourava lineage, went to the extremely generous lord of the kingdom[Yudhishthira and Virata respectively.]. He was worshipped by kings among men and was as difficult to approach as a venomous serpent[These are references to Yudhishthira.]. He was a bull among men
in his strength and beauty. He was grand and radiant, like an immortal. He was like the sun, enveloped in a great
mass of clouds. The brave one was like the fire, covered in ashes. The Pandava approached, like the moon shrouded in clouds. On seeing this, King Virata questioned the advisers, brahmanas and vaishyas who were seated there.

"Who is the one who has approached me, setting his eyes on my assembly hall for the first time? This supreme
among men cannot be a brahmana. It seems to me that he must be a lord of the earth, though he doesn't possess a
servant, a chariot or an earring. When he nears, he is as resplendent as Indra. It is my view that the marks on his
body indicate that he is one whose head has been anointed[As a king.]. He approaches me without any hesitation, the way a
rutting elephant nears a pond full of lotuses." While he was thus reflecting, Yudhishthira, bull among men, approached Virata and spoke to him. "O emperor! Know that I am a brahmana who has lost everything and has come
here in search of a livelihood. O unblemished one! O lord! I wish to live here with you, following your instructions." On hearing this, the king happily welcomed him.

'Thereafter, he spoke to him[Yudhishthira.]. "Please accept our homage. O son[The word used is tata.]! I am welcoming you with delight. Now tell
me. From which king's dominion have you arrived here? Tell me truthfully, your name and your lineage. Which is
the art that you wish to pursue here?" Yudhishthira replied, "In earlier times, I used to be Yudhishthira's friend. I
am a brahmana from Vyaghrapada's lineage. I am skilled at throwing the dice and gambling. O Virata! I am known
by the name of Kanka." Virata said, "I grant you the boon that you desire. Rule over Matsya and I will serve you. I
have always loved skilled and shrewd gamblers. You are like a god and deserve a kingdom." Yudhishthira replied,
"O lord of the earth! O Matsya! If there is ever a great dispute, I will never accept the views of anyone who is inferior. But no one whom I defeat will retain his riches. Through your favours, please grant me this boon." Virata
said, "If anything unpleasant is done towards you, I will kill even those who should not be killed. If it is a brahmana, I will exile him from my kingdom[Since a brahmana cannot be killed.]. Let all the assembled citizens hear that Kanka is as much a lord of the
kingdom as I am. You will be my friend and ride on the same vehicle. You will have many garments and a lot of
food and drink. You will always look towards my inner and outer affairs. My door will always be open for you.
When oppressed people approach you in search of work, you can always give them word on my behalf. There is
no doubt that I will give them everything that has been promised. In my presence, you will not find anything to be
scared of." Having thus met King Virata and obtained the boon from him, the brave bull among men began to
dwell there happily. He was shown the ultimate honours. No one there got to know about his true intentions.'
