Vaishampayana said,  'He  was  Brihaspati's  equal  in  intelligence  and  Brahma's  equal  in  forgiveness.  He  was
Shakra's equal in valour and as infinitely energetic as Aditya. Gangeya was extremely radiant and had been
brought down in the battle by Arjuna. With his brothers and the others, Yudhishthira worshipped him. The one
without decay was waiting for the right time and was lying down on a hero's bed. The maharshis arrived, wishing
to see the foremost one among the Bharata lineage. There were Atri, Vasishtha, Bhrigu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu,
Angiras, Goutama, Agastya, Sumati, controlled in his soul, Vishvamitra, Sthulashira, Samvarta, Pramati, Dama,
Ushanas, Brihaspati, Vyasa, Chyavana, Kashyapa, Dhruva, Durvasa, Jamadagni, Markandeya, Galava, Bharadvaja,
Raibhya, Yavakrita, Trita, Sthulaksha, Shakalaksha, Kanva, Medhatithi, Krisha, Narada, Parvata, Sudhanva, Ekata,
Dvita, Nitambhu, Bhuvana, Dhoumya, Shatananda, Kritavrana, Jamadagnya Rama, Kamya, Chetya and others.
These great-souled maharshis arrived to see Bhishma. In due order, with his brothers, Yudhishthira worshipped the
great-souled ones who had arrived. Having been worshipped, the maharshis seated themselves and began to converse. In extremely gentle tones, which delighted all the senses, they talked about Bhishma. On hearing the words
of the rishis, who had cleansed their souls, Bhishma was supremely delighted and satisfied and thought that he was
already in heaven. While everyone looked on, taking the leave of Bhishma and the Pandavas, all the rishis vanished. Though those extremely fortunate rishis had disappeared, all the Pandavas continued to repeatedly worship
and bow down before them. With cheerful minds, all these supreme Kurus presented themselves before Gangeya,
like those who know about mantras presenting themselves before the rising sun. Because of the powers of austerities of the rishis, the Pandavas saw that the directions were ablaze. All of them were quite astounded at this. They
thought that the rishis were much more than fortunate. The Pandavas started to converse with Bhishma. When that
conversation was over, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, touched Bhishma's feet with his head and again questioned
him  about  dharma.  "O  grandfather!  Which  countries,  provinces,  hermitages,  mountains  and  rivers  are  really
sacred?"

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between a person
who followed shilonchhavritti and one who had obtained success[There are grains left after a crop has been harvested, or after grain has been milled. If one subsists on these leftovers, that is known as unchhavritti. Shila means gathering the stalks. Shilonchhavritti can be therefore regarded
as equivalent to unchhavritti or to shilavritti.]. A best among bipeds roamed over the entire
earth, adorned with mountains. He finally arrived at the house of someone who was best among those who followed shilavritti. Once he arrived, he was duly honoured. After the ablutions, the guest, who had obtained success,
seated himself. Those great-souled ones seated themselves and started to talk about auspicious things, such as what
was in the Vedas and in their appendices, and their various attributes. When this conversation was over, the intelligent one who followed shilavritti carefully asked the one who had obtained success to answer the question that you
have asked me.

'"Shilavritti asked, 'Which countries, provinces, hermitages, mountains and rivers are really sacred? Tell me
that.'

'"The Siddha[Literally, the successful one.]  replied,  'Countries,  provinces,  hermitages  and  mountains  are  best  when  Bhagirathi  Ganga,
supreme among rivers, flows through them. Through austerities, brahmacharya, sacrifices and renunciation, a creature cannot obtain the ends that can be obtained by frequenting the Ganga. If the limbs have been sprinkled with
the waters of the Ganga, or if creatures cast aside their bodies there, they are not dislodged from heaven. O brahmana! When embodied creatures perform all their rites in the waters of the Ganga, having left earth, such men are
permanently in heaven. Men may have committed sins in the earlier parts of their lives. However, later, if they reside near the Ganga, they advance towards a supreme end. If men control their souls and bathe in the pure waters
of the Ganga, they obtain merits that are greater than those obtained through one hundred sacrifices. As long as a
man's bones are established in the waters of the Ganga, he obtains greatness in heaven for thousands of years. The
run rises in the morning and through its radiance, dispels the terrible darkness. In that way, when washed by the
waters of the Ganga, the sins are dispelled and one is radiant. Without the auspicious waters of the Ganga, countries and directions are deprived, like a night without the moon, or a tree without flowers. Without the Ganga, the
universe is like sacrifices without soma, or the varna and ashrama system, with everyone deprived of knowledge
about his own dharma. There is no doubt that deprived of the Ganga, countries and directions are as deprived as
the firmament without the sun, the earth without mountains, or the sky without air. When they obtain the auspicious waters of the Ganga, all the beings in the three worlds are supremely satisified and become content. Drinking
water from the Ganga, heated by the sun, is superior to picking out and eating food from the excrement of a cow.
To purify one's body, a person may perform one thousand chandrayana sacrifices. It is impossible to determine
whether this is equal, or unequal, to drinking the water of the Ganga. A man may stand on a single foot for one
thousand yugas. It is impossible to determine whether this is equal, or unequal, to standing in a similar way in the
Ganga for one month. A man may remain for ten thousand yugas, with his face hanging downwards. However, if
one remains on the banks of the Ganga for some time, that is superior. O supreme among brahmanas! When cotton
is burnt in a fire, nothing is left. In that way, through submerging in the Ganga, all sins are washed away. The consciousness of all creatures is taken away by misery. If they seek an escape, there is no escape that is equal to the
Ganga. On seeing Tarkshya[Garuda.], a snake loses its poison. In that way, on seeing Ganga, one is freed from all sins.
Because of their addiction towards adharma, there are those who are without any status. They obtain refuge, prosperity and protection from the Ganga. There are many who are worst among men, prone to inauspicious deeds and
destined for hell. After death, they are saved by the Ganga. Those who always advance towards the Ganga are certainly counted together with the sages and the gods, with Vasava. There are many who are inauspicious and worst
among men, devoid of good conduct and humility. O brahmana! When they resort to the Ganga, they become auspicious. The waters of the Ganga are for men what amrita is for the gods, svadha is for the ancestors and sudha is
for serpents[Here, sudha is best understood as milk and not as nectar.]. Children who are afflicted by hunger seek out their mothers. In that way, embodied beings who desire welfare seek out the Ganga. Svayambhu's region is said to be the best. In that fashion, Ganga is said to be the
best among rivers to bathe in. Cattle and the earth are said to be the best means of sustenance for the gods and others. In that way, for all beings on earth, Ganga is the means of sustenance. The gods are established in the sun and
the moon and sustain themselves through sacrifices and amrita. For men, the waters of the Ganga are like that. If a
man smears himself with sand from the banks of the Jahnavi and arises, he can think of himself as adorned as the
gods in heaven. If a person raises up mud from the banks of the Jahnavi and smears it on his head, he becomes radiant, as sparkling and radiant as the sun, the dispeller of darkness. If water mixed with drops of water from the
Ganga's waves touches a man, he is instantly cleansed of all sin. If a man is afflicted by hardships and is about to
be destroyed, the mere sight of the Ganga cheers him up and dispels those hardships. Swans, ruddy geese and other
birds crying on the Ganga challenge the gandharvas and her banks challenge tall mountains. There are swans and
many other kinds of birds on the Ganga. There are herds of cattle along the banks. On seeing these, one forgets
heaven. The supreme delight obtained by men who reside along the banks of the Ganga is greater than the bliss
from residing in heaven, with all one's wishes gratified. There may be a man who has committed the worst of sins
in speech, thought and deeds. There is no doubt that on seeing Ganga, he is purified. If a man sees, touches and
bathes in the Ganga, he saves seven generations of his ancestors and seven generations of his descendants. In particular, by wishing to hear about the Ganga, seeing it, touching it and drinking its waters, a man rescues both his
family lines[On the father's side and on the mother's side.]. By seeing, touching, drinking and praising the Ganga, hundreds and thousands of sinners become
purified. People who desire to make their births, lives and learning successful should go to the Ganga and worship
the ancestors and the gods. Through sons, riches and deeds, a man cannot obtain the fruits that can be derived
through approaching the Ganga. If a person, though able, does not go and see the sacred and auspicious waters of
the Ganga, he is like one born blind, or one who is dead or disabled. The Ganga is worshipped by maharshis who
know about the past, the present and the future, and by the gods, together with Indra. Which man will not worship
it? Those in vanaprastha and garhasthya, those who are mendicants and brahmacharis and those who have knowledge and learning resort to the Ganga. Which man will not seek refuge there? When a man is about to give up his
breath of life, if he behaves virtuously, controls himself and thinks of the Ganga, he obtains the supreme objective.
If a man worships the Ganga at the time of giving up his body, he has no fear from fear and does not suffer from
any sin. The extremely sacred goddess fell down from the sky and was held by Maheshvara on his head. It is she
who is there in heaven. The three sparkling courses adorn the three worlds[Ganga flows in heaven (as Mandakini), on earth (as Bhagirathi/Ganga) and in the nether regions (as Bhogavati).]. A man who frequents her waters becomes successful in every possible way. Among the rivers of earth, Ganga is like the lord of the gods[This can also be loosely translated as a lord among men, or king.] to men,
the moon to the ancestors and the sun to the stellar bodies in the firmament. The misery on being separated from a
mother, a father, sons, wives or riches is nothing compared to the sorrow on being separated from the Ganga.
Through meritorious deeds, sons and the inflow of riches, men do not obtain as much gratification as they do from
seeing the Ganga. The hearts of men are delighted on seeing the full moon. On seeing the Ganga, which possesses
three flows, hearts rejoice in that fashion. With faith, single-mindedness, devotion and steadfastness, if a devotee
worships the Ganga, he becomes her beloved. Creatures who are on earth, in the sky or in heaven, and even those
who are higher still, should always bathe in the Ganga. This is a task indicated for the virtuous. Ganga is sacred
and is famous in the three worlds. She is illustrious. Sagara's sons, who were reduced to ashes, were conveyed by
her to heaven[The sage Kapila reduced Sagara's sons to ashes. A descendant, Bhagiratha, brought Ganga down to earth and
when those ashes were washed by the waters of the Ganga, Sagara's sons were saved.].

'"'Ganga's waves are tall, bright and sparkling and arise, after being driven by winds that make a loud noise.
Those who are washed by these are purified and become as radiant as the sun, the one with the one thousand rays.
The prosperous waters are swift and difficult to immerse in. They are like the clarified butter generously offered at
sacrifices. Patient men who go to the Ganga and give up their lives there, become like the gods. The Ganga is illustrious and large. The universe is her form. She is worshipped by the sages and by the gods, with Indra at their
head. She grants all the objects of desire to those who are blind, dumb and bereft of possessions. Her water is full
of energy and is sweet as honey. She is extremely sacred and has three flows. She is the protector of the three
worlds. Those who seek refuge with the Ganga, go to heaven. If a mortal person dwells near her and sees her, the
gods grant him happiness. He is cleansed by the touch and the sight. The gods grant him auspicious directions. She
is large, excellent and accomplished. She is the earth. She is auspicious and like amrita. She is lovely and extremely gracious. She is brilliant and all creatures are established in her. A person who goes to Ganga goes to heaven.
Her fame is always known on earth, in the sky and in heaven, and fills the directions and the minor directions. She
is supreme among rivers, and by resorting to her waters, all mortal beings accomplish their objectives. This Ganga
is always established. She bore the golden Guha in her womb[Guha is Kartikeya. In the story of Kartikeya's birth, Agni handed over the energy to Ganga, who then deposited
it in a clump of reeds.]. She possesses three flows. She has descended as
the water of the universe. She is like a flow of clarified butter. If a person bathes in the Ganga in the morning, he is
cleansed of all sin. She is a daughter of the mountains and is Hara's wife. She is like an ornament of heaven and
earth. She is the radiant one who sustains the earth. O king[Since Shilavritti is being addressed, this is an inconsistency.]! Ganga is the purifier of the three worlds. Her flows
are as sweet as honey. She is like the clarified butter offered at sacrifices. She is adorned with large waves and with
brahmanas. Ganga is like a garland in heaven. She is the daughter of the mountains. She descended from heaven
and was held by Bhava on his head. She is the best of wombs. She is radiant and subtle. Fame is granted by her
roaring and surging waters. She is the one who protects the universe. Her form is one that confers the greatest benefit. For heaven and for earth, Ganga is the path to follow. In forgiveness, protection and sustenance, brahmanas
revere Ganga as the earth's equal. She is like the fire and the sun in her radiance. In being gracious towards the
brahmanas, she is always like Guha. She is ancient and is praised by the rishis. She emerged from Vishnu's feet.
Her waters are extremely auspicious and take one to the worlds one can think of. A person who resorts to Jahnavi
with all his soul, goes to Brahma's world. She possesses all the qualities and with all their souls, there are people
who worship her, like sons towards their mothers. She is the one who facilitates the restraint of one's soul. If a person desires benefit in Brahma's abode, he should worship Ganga. She is like a pleasant cow that provides her waters to the universe. She is like an ocean of prosperity, as sweet as honey. She is like the amrita desired by the virtuous and is loved by Brahma. Those who seek success in their souls seek refuge with Ganga. Through his fierce
austerities, Bhagiratha worshipped the lord and the god[Vishnu.], pleased him and brought down Ganga. Men who go to
her can free themselves of all fear, in this world and in the next. Using the best of my intelligence, I have considered and recounted some of her qualities. However, I do not possess the capacity to enumerate and speak about all
her qualities. One can enumerate all the jewels in Meru and all the waters that exist in the ocean. But one is incapable of enumerating all the qualities of the waters of the Ganga. Resorting to devotion, one should listen to Jah-
navi's supreme qualities and show great faith and reverence, in words, thoughts and deeds. One will then obtain
fame and prosperity in the three worlds. One will then obtain the great success, created by Ganga herself, one that
is difficult to obtain. In a short while, you will roam around in the desired worlds. She possesses all the great qualities. If we are devoted to our own dharma, may she always turn our intelligence towards her. Ganga is affectionate
towards those who seek refuge with her. She grants happiness to those who worship her with faith.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The successful one was radiant. In this way, he expounded the many qualities of the one
with the three flows to Shilavritti. Having instructed him in many ways and having told him about the truth of her
form, he ascended up into the sky. Shilavritti was awakened by the words of the successful one. In the proper way,
he worshipped Ganga and obtained the kind of success that is extremely difficult to obtain. O Kounteya! Therefore, resort to great devotion and always worship Ganga. You will obtain supreme success."'

Vaishampayana said, 'This is the history that Bhishma recounted and Yudhishthira and his brothers were filled
with great delight at hearing about Ganga's praise. This is a sacred history, filled with praise about Ganga. Even
now, if a person hears it or reads it, he is freed from all sins.'
