Vaishampayana said, 'Those two tigers among men stationed themselves on their chariots on both sides of the forest and a great slaughter of all beings began in every direction. Wherever they saw a creature that dwelt in Khanda-
va trying to escape, those two heroes pursued it. No hole could be seen in the swift power of the chariots[The sense is that no hole to escape could be found between the two chariots.]. Those
two excellent chariots and the two charioteers seemed to be as one. As Khandava blazed, thousands of beings leapt
in the ten[The eight cardinal points, plus above and below.] directions, uttering frightened yells. Some were burnt in one spot. Some were scorched. The eyes burst
out for some. Some withered away. Some lost their minds and scattered. Some clung to their sons, others to their
fathers and mothers. Out of affection, they were unable to let go and perished. Others rose up in their thousands,
their forms distorted. But they were whirled around and again flung into the fire. Some rolled on the ground, their
wings, eyes and feet scorched. They were seen there, their bodies destroyed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
All the waterbodies began to boil. In their thousands, the turtles and the fishes were seen dead. In that destruction
of beings in the forest, the burning bodies seemed like flaming torches. Those that ascended upwards were cut to
pieces by Partha's arrows, as he laughingly flung them back into the flames. Uttering loud wails, their bodies
pierced everywhere by arrows, from above, they were swiftly flung back again into the fire. Pierced by arrows and
in flames, the sounds made by the forest-dwellers was heard, like the ocean when it was churned. The huge flames
of the delighted fire rose up into the sky and created great consternation among the dwellers of heaven. They
sought refuge with the thousand-eyed Purandara[Indra has one thousand eyes.], the king of the gods. The gods said, "O lord of the immortals!
Why is the fire burning all these people? Is it the case that the end of the worlds has arrived?" Having heard this,
the slayer of Vritra[Indra. Indra slew a demon named Vritra.] himself looked down.

'Harivahana[Harivahana is Indra's name, because Hari is the name of Indra's horse. The word hari means tawny, so that
was probably the horse's colour.] set out to save Khandava. Covering the sky with a great mass of clouds in many forms, the lord
of the gods and the wielder of the vajra began to pour down rain. The thousand-eyed one showered down rain on
the fire raging in Khandava from hundreds and thousands of clouds, in shafts as thick as the axles[Of chariots.]. But the heat
of the fire dried up these showers before they reached. Not a single one reached the fire. Then the slayer of Na-
muchi[Indra slew a demon named Namuchi.] became very angry with the fire. He again started to rain down, in many torrents. Then the flames fought
with those showers, mingled with smoke and lightning. With the sound of the roar, that forest became terrible to
look at.'
