Yudhishthira said, "The great-souled one was engaged in fierce austerities. Though we, his relatives, are here,
he died without a protector. Since Vichitravirya's son has been burnt down in a forest conflagration, it is my
view that the fortune of men is extremely difficult to decipher. He had one hundred handsome sons, with strength
in their arms. The king himself possessed the strength of ten thousand elephants. Yet, he has been burnt down in a
forest conflagration. Earlier, the best of women used to fan him with fans made out of palm leaves. Since he has
been consumed in a forest conflagration, vultures are fanning him now. Large numbers of bards and minstrels used
to wake him from sleep earlier. Because of my wicked deeds, the king is lying down on the ground now. I am not
grieving over the illustrious Gandhari, whose sons have been slain. Devoted to her husband's vows, she has got the
world obtained by her husband. But I sorrow over Pritha. She abandoned the extremely great and blazing prosperity of her sons and chose to reside in the forest instead. Shame on our kingdom. Shame on our strength. Shame on
our valour. Shame on the dharma of kshatriyas and on the fact that we are alive while she is dead. O  supreme
among the best of brahmanas! The progress of time is indeed exceedingly subtle, since she abandoned the kingdom and desired to reside in the forest. She is the mother of Yudhishthira, Bhima and Vijaya. Without a protector,
how could she have been burnt down? When I think of this, I am stupefied. Savyasachi pacified the fire god in
Khandava and that was pointless[Described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. It is my view that he[Agni.] ignored that good deed and was ungrateful. The illustrious
one burnt down Savyasachi's mother. He assumed the disguise of a brahmana and arrived, seeking alms. Shame on
Agni. Shame on Partha's fame and unwavering aim. O illustrious one! There is something else that brings me
greater grief. How could the lord of the earth suffer from a futile death from the fire? Rajarshi Kourava decided to
become an ascetic. He ruled the earth. How can this kind of death be praised for him? In the great forest, there are
also fires that have been sanctified by mantras. Since my father was so devoted, how could he have been consumed
by a futile fire? Pritha was emaciated and reduced to veins alone. I think that in great fear, she must have trembled
and shrieked, 'O son! O Dharmaraja! O Bhima! Save me from the fear that has surrounded me from all sides.'

Anxious because of the fire, my mother must have run around in every direction. She loved Sahadeva more than
her own sons. But that brave son of Madravati did not save her."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Hearing this, all of them clung to each other and wept. The five Pandavas were afflicted by grief, like creatures at the time of the destruction of a yuga. The sounds of those Indras among men
weeping filled the rooms of the palace and seemed to rise up to the space between heaven and earth.'
