Chyavana said, 'Accept a boon from me. What is the doubt in your heart? O foremost among men! Tell me
what it is and I will explain everything to you.'

'"Kushika said, 'O illustrious one! O Bhargava! If you are pleased with me, tell me something. I wish to hear
the reason why you decided to reside with me. What was the reason for sleeping on the bed for twenty-one days,
without changing sides? O bull among sages! Why did you depart, without saying anything? Why did you suddenly  disappear  and  again  reveal  yourself?  O  brahmana! You  again  slept  for  twenty-one  days.  After  having  been
rubbed with oil, you left my house, without having eaten. There were many kinds of food that were brought, but
you burnt them down with fire. Why did you suddenly and swiftly depart on a chariot? Why did you give away the
riches? Why did you show us the forest? O great sage! There were many golden palaces there. You showed us
beds where the bed posts were decorated with jewels. Then you made them disappear again. I wish to hear the rea-
'"C
son for this. I am extremely confused by this and have thought about this day and night. But I have been unable to
understand anything about this. O store of austerities! I wish to hear the entire truth about this.'

'"Chyavana replied, 'Listen in detail to all the reasons. O king! Since you have asked me, I cannot refuse to tell
you. Earlier, in an assembly of the gods, the grandfather said something. O king! I heard that and will tell you. Listen. Because of a conflict between a brahmana and a kshatriya, my lineage will become mixed up and tainted. O
king! Your grandson will be full of energy and valour. That is the reason I have come to you, to save my lineage. O
Kushika! I desired to exterminate and burn down your lineage. O lord of the earth! Earlier, that is the reason I
came to you and said, "I am observing a vow. You should serve me. However, while I resided in your house, I
could not detect any signs of wicked conduct. O rajarshi! That is the reason you are still alive. Otherwise, you
would no longer have been here. That is the reason I decided to sleep for twenty-one days. O king! I was hoping
that someone would wake me up. But you and your wife allowed me to sleep and did not wake me. O supreme
among kings! That is when my mind became pleased with you. O lord of the earth! O lord! I awoke and departed. I
was hoping that you would restrain me, so that I could curse you. I repeatedly disappeared in your house. For
twenty-one days, I again immersed myself in yoga. O lord of men! You were hungry and exhausted and I was hoping that you would show your anger. That is the reason I afflicted you with hunger. O king! However, I could not
detect the slightest bit of anger in your mind. O best among men! I became pleased with you and your wife. When
I had the food brought and burnt it down, I was hoping that you would be overcome by anger. But you tolerated
that. O lord of men! That is when I ascended the chariot and told you and your wife to drag me along. But you did
what I had asked you to. O lord of men! You did not show any doubts and I was pleased with you. You were not
overcome with rage when I gave away the riches. O king! O lord of men! While I was pleased with you, for you
and your wife, I created the forest that you saw. To please you, I showed you heaven. O king! In that forest, you
saw some signs of heaven. O king! You saw a little bit of heaven in your physical body. O king! O supreme among
kings! For a short while, you and your wife witnessed that. O lord of men! This was to demonstrate to you the
dharma of austerities. O king! I am aware of the desire that there is in your heart. O lord of the earth! Through your
austerities, you desire to obtain the status of a brahmana. O king! You have no interest in being a king on earth or
being a king of the gods. O son! However, the status of a brahmana will be extremely difficult for you to obtain.
Having become a brahmana, it is difficult to become a rishi. Having become a rishi, it is difficult to become an ascetic. O Kushika! But your desire will come true. There will be a Koushika[Vishvamitra.] who will become a brahmana. He
will be third in descent from you and he will obtain the status of a brahmana. O best among kings! He will be born
in your lineage, but he will possess the energy of the Bhrigus. Your grandson will become a brahmana. He will be
an ascetic, with the resplendence of the fire. He will be one who will cause fright to gods and men and to the three
worlds. I tell you this truthfully. O rajarshi! Ask for the boon that is in your mind. A  long period of  time has
elapsed and I wish to proceed on a visit to the tirthas.'

'"Kushika said, 'O great sage! This is enough of a boon, since you are pleased with me. O unblemished one! Let
my grandson become a brahmana through his austerities. O illustrious one! Grant me the boon that my lineage
should always have that status. O illustrious one! Once again, I wish to ask you about this in detail. O descendant
of the Bhrigu lineage! How will my lineage obtain the status of a brahmana? Who will be my relative? Whom will
I honour?'"'
