Vaishampayana said, 'Madhusudana entered his residence and slept. He awoke when one yama was left of the
night[A night consists of three yamas. So a yama is four hours.]. Madhava engaged in meditating on all forms of knowledge. After that, he thought of the eternal brahman.
There were those who were learned in the sacred texts and the Puranas, possessing melodious voices. They praised
Prajapati Vasudeva, the creator of the universe. They recited, clapped their hands and sang songs. Thousands of
conch shells, drums and tambourines were sounded. There were the beautiful sounds of veenas, cymbals and
flutes. Like a drawn-out laugh, they were heard to emanate from his residence. Loud and pleasant words, with auspicious sounds, were also heard for King Yudhishthira, mixed with songs and the sound of musical instruments.
Dasharha Achyuta arose. He bathed. Joining his hands in salutation, the mighty-armed one lit a fire. Standing before it, he meditated on a secret mantra. There were thousands of brahmanas who were learned about the four
Vedas. Madhava promised each of them one thousand cows. Having touched an auspicious object, Krishna then
looked at himself in a spotless mirror and told Satyaki, "O descendant of the Shini lineage! Go to the king's residence and ascertain if the immensely energetic Yudhishthira has prepared himself for visiting Bhishma." At
Krishna's words, Satyaki quickly went to King Yudhishthira and told him, "O king! The intelligent Vasudeva's
supreme chariot is yoked. Janardana is ready to leave for the son of the river. O Dharmaraja! O immensely radiant
one! Krishna is waiting for you. You should now do what must immediately be done."

'Yudhishthira said, "O Phalguna! O infinitely radiant one! Let the supreme chariot be yoked. There is no need
for the soldiers to go. We will go alone. Let us not afflict Bhishma, supreme among those who uphold dharma. O
Dhananjaya! Let the advance guard also refrain. From today, Gangeya will speak about supreme secrets. O
Kounteya! I do not desire that ordinary people should assemble there."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, paid heed to these words. As instructed, the bull among men
had that supreme chariot prepared and informed him. King Yudhishthira, the twins, Bhima and Arjuna went to
Krishna's residence, like the five elements assembled together. As the great-souled Pandavas arrived, together with
Shini's descendant, the intelligent Krishna went out and ascended his chariot. Astride their chariots, they asked
each other whether they had spent the night in happiness. Then the maharathas left on those supreme chariots, with
a roar like that of the clouds. Daruka goaded Vasudeva's horses, Meghapushpa, Balaha, Sainya and Sugriva. O
king! Goaded by Daruka, Vasudeva's horses tore up the ground with their hooves. Those immensely strong ones
departed with great force, seeming to devour the sky. They passed over all of Kurukshetra, the field that was full of
dharma. They went to the spot where the lord Bhishma was lying down on his bed of arrows. He was in the midst
of brahmarshis, like Brahma amidst a large number of gods. Govinda and Yudhishthira descended from their chariots and so did Bhima, the wielder of Gandiva, the twins and Satyaki. They raised their right hands and honoured
the rishis. They then surrounded the king, like the nakshatras around the moon. They approached Gangeya, like
Vasava towards Brahma. He was lying down on a bed of arrows, as if the sun had fallen down. On seeing this, the
mighty-armed one[Yudhishthira.] was struck with fear and timidity.'
