'The gandharva said, "Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Vashishtha, the Brahmana rishi[Shakti's son Parashara.] controlled his anger, which would have destroyed all the worlds. But the immensely energetic Parashara, Shakti's son
and chief among those who were learned in the Vedas, performed a rakshasa sacrifice. Remembering Shakti's
slaughter, the great sage began to consume rakshasas, old and young, in that sacrifice. Not wishing to restrain him
from this second vow, Vashishtha did not prevent him from destroying the rakshasas. The great sage sat at that sacrifice, with three blazing fires in front of him. He himself looked like a fourth fire. Many were the offerings that
were poured at this radiant sacrifice and the sky was lit up, like the sun emerging from behind the clouds.
Vashishtha and the other sages regarded the sage, blazing with his own radiance, like a second sun. Thereupon, the
great and noble-minded sage Atri came to that place, wishing to put an end to the sacrifice, a task that would have
been impossible for anyone else to accomplish.

'"O destroyer of enemies! Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu also came to that great sacrifice, since they also desired
that the rakshasas should live. O bull of the Bharata lineage! O Partha! On seeing that many rakshasas had already
been killed, Pulastya spoke to Parashara, that chastiser of enemies. 'O son! Do you find no obstructions in the way
of this sacrifice? O son! Do you find pleasure in killing all these rakshasas, who are ignorant and innocent[Because they had nothing to do with Shakti's death.]? O
Parashara! You are foremost among those who drink the soma juice. You should not destroy all my progeny in this
way. You are a virtuous man. You should not think that the path of adharma will be good for you. King Kalmashapada himself wishes to ascend to heaven. Shakti's younger brothers, sons of the great sage Vashishtha, are now enjoying great happiness in the company of the gods. O son! O hermit! All this was known to the great sage
Vashishtha, including the destruction of the rakshasas. O Vashishtha's descendant! You have only been an instrument in this sacrifice. Be fortunate and give up this sacrifice. Let it come to an end now.' Having been thus addressed by Pulastya and the wise Vashishtha, Shakti's son Parashara brought an end to the sacrifice. The sage
threw away the fire that had been lit for the rakshasa sacrifice into the great forest that was to the north of the Himalayas. Even today, the fire is always visible there in all the seasons, consuming rakshasas, trees and rocks."'
