'Sanjaya said, "Desiring success, Saindhava checked the Pandus. There commenced an extremely terrible battle
between those on your side and the enemy. Arjuna's son, invincible and unwavering in his aim, penetrated the soldiers and agitated them, like a makara in the ocean. The foremost among them, supreme among the Kurus, advanced duly against Subhadra's son, the scorcher of enemies who was causing the agitation with his shower of arrows. That clash between him and them was extremely terrible and the infinitely energetic ones created showers of
arrows. Arjuna's son was obstructed in every direction by chariots of the enemy and killed Vrishasena's charioteer
and severed his bow. The powerful one then pierced his horses with arrows and those horses, which were as swift
as the wind, bore his[Vrishasena's.] chariot away from the field of battle. Using that opportunity, Abhimanyu's charioteer freed
his chariot from that melee. On seeing the chariot emerge, there was delight and roars of applause. He[Abhimanyu.] was like a
lion and enraged, mangling the enemy with his arrows. Without any fear, Vasatiya swiftly advanced and attacked
him. He restrained Abhimanyu with sixty gold-tufted arrows and said, 'As long as I am alive, you will not escape
from this battle with your life.' He was clad in iron armour. But Subhadra's son used a swift arrow to pierce him in
the heart. Losing his life, he fell down on the ground. On seeing that Vasatiya had been killed, the bulls among the
kshatriyas were enraged. O king! They surrounded your grandson, wishing to kill him. They stretched their many
different kinds of bows in many different kinds of ways. A terrible battle raged between Subhadra's son and the
enemy. Phalguna's son was wrathful. He sliced down their arrows and bows and the heads from the bodies, decorated with earrings and garlands. Severed arms were seen, decorated with golden ornaments. They held swords and
finger guards, lances and battleaxes. Garlands, ornaments, garments and giant standards fell down. There were armour and shields, necklaces, crowns, umbrellas and whisks. It became impassable because of decorations, seats
and poles. There were shattered and fragmented axles, wheels and yokes in thousands. There were anukarshas[It is not obvious what an anukarsha is. It is something that was used to attract or pull and may have been some
kind of hook.].
And flags, charioteers, horses, broken chariots and slain elephants, strewn all over the ground. Many brave kshatriyas, the lords of many countries, who had surrounded him with a desire for victory, were killed. They were
strewn on the ground and it looked terrible. The angry Abhimanyu was in the field of battle, roaming in all the directions and sub-directions, and his form could not be seen. His golden armour and ornaments could alone be seen
and also his bow and arrows. No one was capable of glancing at him with his eyes. He killed the warriors with his
arrows and was stationed like the sun in their midst."'
