'Ashtaka asked, "O one who is foremost among those of Krita Yuga[The first of the four yugas, also known as Satya Yuga.]! You could assume any form at will. You
spent a million years in the garden of Nandana. Why did you have to give it up and come to earth?"

'Yayati replied, "Here, friends and relatives forsake a man who has lost his wealth. There, the gods and their
lord forsake one whose merit has been diminished."

'Ashtaka said, "I am curious to know how one's merit is diminished there. My mind is confused on this. Please
also tell me which worlds are attained through which means. Please tell me. I know that you know the subject."

'Yayati replied, "O god among men! With great lamentations, those who speak of their own merits are hurled
down to the hell known as bhouma. Though actually lean, they grow and become food for vultures, dogs and jackals. Therefore, in this world, a man should avoid evil acts that are condemned. O king! I have now told you everything. Please tell me, what else should I say."

'Ashtaka said, "When life is destroyed through age and they are torn apart by vultures, peacocks[The word used is shitikantha, which means white in the neck. This means a peacock, though some kind of
vulture with a white neck is also possible.] and insects,
where do they live and how do they come to life again? I have not heard of a hell named bhouma."

'Yayati replied, "When they have ascended from their bodies, depending on their deeds, they are born again on
earth. They descend into the hell known as bhouma, and it is impossible to count the many number of years spent
there. Some fall in the sky for 60,000 years. Some others fall for 80,000 years. They then fall to bhouma and are
attacked by terrible rakshasas with sharp teeth."

'Ashtaka said, "When they fall thus to bhouma, why are they attacked by terrible rakshasas with sharp teeth?
How do they continue to exist? How do the dead enter the womb again?"

'Yayati replied, "Just as raindrops cling to flowers and fruit, they cling to the semen created by man. They then
enter a woman at the time of her season and become an embryo in the womb. In visible form, life enters trees,
herbs, water, air, the earth and the sky. Thus do the dead become embryos again, in the form of bipeds and
quadrupeds."

'Ashtaka said, "Does a seed enter the womb with the old form? Or does it get a new form? How is a human
womb entered? Tell me, because I still have doubts. How is the visible form of limbs, eyes, ears and senses acquired? Since I am asking you, tell me all this. O father! You know everything on the subject."

'Yayati replied, "When it is the season, the invisible form enters the womb through the sperm, like into a flower
with its juices. Depending on the rights that have been acquired[That is, through the merits of one's earlier deeds.], the embryo develops with the passage of time.
When the limbs are developed and the six[As enumerated in what immediately follows, the five sense organs and mind.] senses established, man is formed. With his ears, he gets to know
sound. With his eyes, he gets to see form. With his nose, he knows smell and with his tongue, taste. With touch, he
gets to feel and with his mind, he gets to know feelings. O Ashtaka! Know that this is how the great atman develops life in the body."

'Ashtaka said, "A man who is dead is burnt, buried in the ground or becomes dust. He is reduced to nothing after death. Later, how does he get to know himself again?"

'Yayati replied, "O lion among kings! A man who dies is like one asleep. However, his good and evil acts are in
front of him. When the body is dead, he assumes some other form with a speed that is swifter than that of the wind.
Those who have performed good deeds go to a pure birth. Those who did evil go to an evil birth. O one with great
feelings! The evil become worms and insects. I will not speak about them. I have told you how the dead become
embryos again-bipeds, quadrupeds and those with six legs. I have told you everything in detail. What more do
you wish to ask?"

'Ashtaka said, "O father! Is there anything that can be done to attain the superior worlds, through austerities and
the pursuit of learning, instead of returning to earth? How does one attain the world of supreme bliss? I am asking
you. Please tell me everything accurately."

'Yayati replied, "Austerities, gifts, tranquillity, self-control, humility and compassion towards all beings. The
learned say a man is deluded and loses everything through pride. A man of knowledge, who thinks himself to be
learned and uses his learning to debase the fame of others, never attains the eternal worlds. Nor does the brahman
yield any fruits to him. There are four acts that dispel all fear of danger, but cause fear if performed in the wrong
way, with pride-offerings before the fire, vow of silence, studying and sacrifices. The learned should find no pride
in homage. The learned should not grieve if insulted. The good always honour the good in this world. The evil
never possess the intelligence of the good. I have paid homage, I have performed sacrifices, I have studied and I
have observed vows. But I have done all this while discarding fear. The learned ones know the ancient one who is
the refuge and is worshipped from the mind. He is the one with a supreme and radiant form, for finding supreme
peace here and in the world hereafter."'
