Vaishampayana said, 'Then another handsome one made his appearance. He was a giant man, but was adorned in
the ornaments of women. He wore earrings that were as large as walls and turrets, made out of long and beautiful
conch shells adorned with gold. His long and abundant hair was combed. He was mighty-armed and his valour was
like that of an elephant. The earth trembled as he advanced. He approached Virata, who was seated in his assembly
hall, an oppressor of enemies who had disguised himself. However, his supreme radiance was dazzling. This was
the son of the great Indra, and like a king of elephants in his valour. On seeing him arrive in the assembly hall, the
king asked all those who were nearby, "Where has he come from? I have not heard of him before." But none of the
men there said that they knew him. In amazement, the king spoke these words. "You are a beautiful man and have
all the endowments. You are dark and young and are equal to the leader of a herd of elephants. You wear beautiful
conch shells that are adorned with gold. You have loosened your hair in a braid and are adorned with earrings.
Your hair is peaked and abundant. But your attire seems to be wrong. You must be an archer, with armour and arrows. Climb onto a swift vehicle. Be like my sons, or like me myself. I am an old man now and wish to ease my
burdens. Swiftly protect the entire region of Matsya. Someone with your form cannot be a eunuch. It seems to my
mind that there is no way this can be true."

'Arjuna replied, "I sing, dance and play musical instruments. I am excellent in dancing and skilled in singing. O
god among men! Give me Uttara[Virata's daughter, who is also being described as the goddess.]. I will myself be the dancer to that goddess. There is no point in recounting
how I came by this form. It will only increase my misery. O god among men! Know my name to be Brihannada. I
have been abandoned by my father and my mother as a son and a daughter[Because Arjuna is in the form of a eunuch.]."
'Virata said, "O Brihannada! I will grant you the boon that you have asked for. Instruct my daughter, and others
like her, in dance. I do not think that such a duty befits you. You deserve the entire earth, up to the frontiers of the
ocean."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having tested Brihannada in dancing, music and other arts, and on determining that he
was a eunuch, the king of Matsya permitted him to enter the quarters of the princess. Lord Dhananjaya instructed
Virata's daughter in singing and music, as well as her friends and attendants. Pandava became very dear to them.
Self-controlled Dhananjaya lived there in disguise and did what pleased them. No one there, outside or in the inner
quarters, got to know about him.'
