'Dhritarashtra asked, "Were there no maharathas among my soldiers who could kill or stop Satyaki on his journey?
Truth is his valour. In that battle, he single-handedly accomplished deeds that were like those of the great Indra
against the danavas. In a battle, he was Shakra's equal in strength. Or is it the case that Satyaki's route was empty?
Single-handedly, the bull among men drove away many soldiers. How did Shini's great-souled descendant singlehandedly overcome the many who attacked him and wished to fight with him? O Sanjaya! Tell me all this."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! The soldiers prepared themselves, with chariots, elephants, horses and infantry. Your
soldiers were tremendous and it was like the end of a yuga. O one who gives honours! Your entire army was assembled. It is my view that an assemblage like this has never been seen in the world. O lord of the earth! The gods
and the assembled charanas said, 'A vyuha like the one Drona has formed at the time of Jayadratha's death will
never again be seen.' There was a terrible roar, like that of the oceans. In that battle, those large numbers of soldiers rushed against each other in waves. O supreme among men! There were many kings, hundreds and thousands, who had assembled on your side and that of the Pandavas. Those brave ones were angry. They were the performers of firm deeds in battle. A great and tumultuous sound arose and it made the body hair stand up. O venerable one! Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva and Pandava Dharmaraja exclaimed, 'Come. Strike. Attack with force. The brave Madhava and Pandava have penetrated into the forces of the enemy. Swiftly act, so that
they can advance towards Jayadratha's death with ease.' Thus did they urge the soldiers. 'If they are vanquished,
the Kurus will have succeeded in their objective and we will have been been defeated. Unite and quickly agitate
this ocean of soldiers, like extremely forceful winds against the ocean.' O king! They were goaded by Bhimasena
and Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.]. In the battle, they killed the Kouravas, ready to give up their beloved lives. They were greatly
energetic and desired death from weapons in that battle, for the sake of heaven and for the sake of their friends.
They were not interested in protecting their lives. O king! In similar fashion, those on your side desired great fame.
The noble ones desired to fight and remained stationed in the battle. A tumultuous battle commenced and it gave
rise to great fear. Having killed all the soldiers, Satyaki proceeded towards Arjuna. In every direction in that battle,
the colourful rays of the sun illuminated the armour and rebuffed the sight of the soldiers who sought to strike
back. O great king! In similar fashion, without any fear, Duryodhana made efforts to immerse himself in the great
army of the Pandaveyas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a fierce clash between them and him.
There was a great destruction among all the soldiers."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O charioteer! When he advanced against those soldiers, he must himself have confronted
great hardships. I hope he did not turn his back on the battle. It seems to me that the encounter between the one and
the many must have been unequal, especially because the single one was a king[This is a reference to Duryodhana single-handedly facing the enemy.]. Duryodhana has been reared
in great happiness. He is also the lord of prosperity and of men. When he single-handedly confronted many, I hope
he did not retreat."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to the extraordinary battle that your son
fought, one against many. Listen. I will describe it. In that battle, Duryodhana suddenly descended on the Pandava
soldiers and agitated them like an elephant, as if he was an elephant among lotuses. O Kourava! On seeing that
your son was acting in this way against the army, the Panchalas, with Bhimasena at the forefront, attacked. He[Duryodhana.]
pierced Bhimasena with ten arrows, each of Madri's sons with three, Virata and Drupada with six each and
Shikhandi with one hundred. He pierced Dhrishtadyumna with twenty, Dharma's son with seven, the Kekayas with
ten and each of Droupadi's sons with three arrows. In that battle, like an angry Yama against beings, he used his
fierce arrows to bring down hundreds of other warriors, elephants and rathas. As he affixed and released arrows,
his bow was seen to be stretched into a continuous circle. He killed the enemy with the skill and strength of his
weapons. He killed the foes with his giant bow that possessed a golden back. O venerable one! The eldest of the
Pandavas[Yudhishthira.] used a couple of broad-headed arrows to sever his bow into three fragments and pierced him with
many sharp and excellent arrows. But having touched the armour, they shattered and penetrated the earth. The delighted Parthas surrounded Yudhishthira, like the rejoicing gods and maharshis around Shakra, when Vritra had
been killed. At this, King Duryodhana picked up a firmer bow and asked the Pandava king to wait. When your maharatha son spoke and advanced against the king, the Panchalas, desiring victory, cheerfully counter-attacked.
Wishing to protect him[Duryodhana.], Drona received the warring Pandavas. He was like a mountain receiving rain from a
cloud that has been stirred up by a violent wind. O king! There was a loud noise in that battle and it rose above
everything else. It was as if Rudra was sporting, when he destroys all living beings."'
