Bhishma said, "O lord of men! On seeing that his disciple had returned, the immensely energetic Devasharma
spoke these words to him. Listen.

'"Devasharma asked, 'O Vipula! What did you see in that great forest? They know about your accomplished
soul and about Ruchi.'

'"Vipula said, 'O brahmana rishi! O lord! Who were the couple? Who were those men? They knew about me.
You should tell me the truth about this.'

'"Devasharma replied, 'O brahmana! Know that the couple was night and day. Whirling around in a circular
way, they knew the truth about your wicked deed. O brahmana! Know that the men who were cheerfully gambling
with the dice were the seasons. They too knew about your wicked deed. No one should be comforted that his
wicked deed will remain unknown. O brahmana! A man hides his wicked soul and his wicked deed. Even if a man
performs a wicked deed secretly, the seasons, night and day are witness to this. They saw that you had not told
your  preceptor  about  your  deed,  but  were  nevertheless,  cheerful.  They  thought  that  a  learned  person  like  you
should be reminded of this. Day and night and the seasons always know the wicked deeds that a man undertakes,
the auspicious, as well as the inauspicious deeds. You did not tell me the truth about what you had done, out of fear
that you had committed a transgression. O brahmana! Knowing that you had not told me, they spoke to you about
it, so that you did not go the worlds that are meant for wicked people. Having committed a deed, you did not tell
me about it. O brahmana! You were capable of protecting a woman, whose nature is evil. You did not do anything
to cause my displeasure and I am pleased with you. O supreme among brahmanas! Had I thought that you had
committed a wicked deed, without thinking about it and in anger, I would have cursed you. Women have intercourse with men and men find this to be an excellent pursuit. However, your intention was to protect her. Otherwise, your end would have been as the recipient of a curse. O son! You protected her and this is known to me. O
son! I am pleased with you. You will progress along a path that is comfortable.'"

'Bhishma said, "The great rishi, Devasharma, was pleased and spoke to Vipula in this way. With his wife and his
disciple, he cheerfully ascended to heaven. O king! In ancient times, in the course of a conversation on the banks
of the Ganga, the great sage, Markandeya, told me about this. O Partha! That is the reason I have said, women
must be protected. Both types of women can always be seen, those who are virtuous and those who are evil. The
ones who are virtuous are extremely fortunate and are revered as the mothers of the worlds. O king! They hold up
this entire earth, with its forests and groves. The ones who are evil are wicked in conduct. Having determined to
sin, they destroy the lineage. O king! They can be known through their wicked signs, naturally manifest on their
bodies. It is in this fashion that great-souled ones are capable of protecting them. O tiger among kings! There is no
other way in which one is capable of protecting women. O tiger among men! They are fierce. They are fierce in
their valour. There is nothing that they love more than sexual intercourse with men. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Even when they have agreed to live with one person, they do not act in this way. O descendant of the Pandu
lineage! They consort with other men. O  lord of  men! Men  should not act out of  affection towards  them, nor
should they be driven by jealousy. They should be enjoyed regretfully, because that is dharma. O descendant of the
Kourava lineage! If a man acts in a contrary way, he will destroy himself. O tiger among men! In every kind of situation, logic is always honoured. That is the single method Vipula used to protect a woman. O king! In this world
of men, there is no other way to protect women."'
