Vaishampayana said, 'Having obtained the king's permission, the powerful King Dhritarashtra, followed by Gand-
hari, went to his own house. Because of the hardships the intelligent one had undergone, he was weak and frail
and walked slowly. The king was like the aged leader of an elephant herd. The learned Vidura and the suta,
Sanjaya, followed him. So  did the great archer,  Kripa Sharadvata. Having entered his house,  the king performed his morning ablutions. He satisfied the best among brahmanas and then ate. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Gandhari, knowledgable about dharma, and the learned Kunti were honoured by their daughters-in-law
with various items and also ate. When they had eaten, Vidura and the others also ate. The Pandavas then sat down
around the king who was the foremost among the Kurus. O great king! Kunti's son was seated near him. Touching
him on the back with his hand, Ambika's son said, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Never be distracted in your
tasks in any way. O tiger among kings! In the eight aspects of the kingdom, always have dharma at the forefront[There are different ways of interpreting the eight parts of the kingdom-treasury, army, judiciary, ministers,
cities, the countryside, fortifications and spies is one possible list.].
O son! O descendant of the Pandu lineage! You are capable of protecting it in that way. O Kounteya! You are
learned. Listen to the dharma of the kingdom. O Yudhishthira! You must always respect those who are learned and
aged. You must listen to what they say and act accordingly, without any reflection. O king! You must arise in the
morning and following the proper rites, worship them. When the time comes for acting, you should ask them what
you should do. O king! O son! O descendant of the Kourava lineage! When you have the welfare of the kingdom
in mind and ask them respectfully, they will tell you everything that should be done for your benefit. All the senses
must be controlled like horses. You will then obtain benefit and it will be like your wealth being preserved. The advisers must be tested. They must be pure and must be those whose fathers and grandfathers have also served. They
must be self-controlled in all the tasks. Whether in superior or inferior positions, such are the people who should
be employed. The spies employed in your kingdom and in that of the enemy must always be tested in many ways
and these spies must be unknown to the enemy. The city must be protected well, with firm walls and gates. In
every direction, the walkways along which guards march must be such as to permit six people to walk abreast. One
must ensure that the gates are adequate and large. They must always be suitably apportioned and protected by machines. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You must always protect yourself and your food[Against poisoning.] using men who are
born in noble lineages and have good conduct. They must know about the objectives. This is also true of periods of
pleasure and in protecting garlands and seats. O Yudhishthira! The women must be properly protected through
aged guards and these must have good conduct, be born in noble lineages and learned. Consultations should be
with those who are humble, born in good lineages, accomplished about dharma and artha and upright. One should
not consult with too many people. Sometimes one needs to consult all of them, sometimes only a few. The chamber for consultations must be protected well. The place for consultations must be one that one climbs up to[So that enemies can't look down at the spot. The night is avoided for the same reason.]. It can
also be a forest that is bereft of thorns. However, consultations must not be during the night. All birds and animals
that imitate men must be barred from the chamber for consultations and so must stupid and lame people[Birds and animals that can imitate humans can repeat the consultations elsewhere.]. It is my
view that the sins that follow from the divulging of consultations of kings can never be countered in any way. O
king! O scorcher of enemies! In the circle of ministers, you must repeatedly speak about the sins that result from
the divulging of consultations and the gains if they are not divulged. O Yudhishthira! Ascertain the good and the
bad in the city and in the countryside. O king! O scorcher of enemies! Your action must be based on what you get
to know."'
