Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing the caves in the mountains resounding with many different kinds of noise and on
not seeing Bhimasena, Kounteya Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira.], Madri's two sons, Dhoumya, Krishna[There is some inconsistency, since Droupadi had herself sent Bhima.], the brahmanas and all
the well-wishers were concerned. Leaving Droupadi in Arshtishena's care, the brave maharathas ascended up the
mountain, arming themselves with weapons. Having reached the mountain's summit, the maharathas, mighty
archers, looked around and saw Bhimasena, the destroyer of enemies, and the gigantic rakshasas, dead and
writhing, mighty in strength and extremely terrible, but felled by Bhimasena. The one with the mighty arms carried
a club, a sword and a bow and was as radiant as Maghavan[Indra.], after slaying all the danavas in battle. Having traversed the supreme route, the Parthas stepped over these, embraced Vrikodara and seated themselves. With those
four mighty archers, the mountain's summit looked as beautiful as heaven with the immensely fortunate lokapalas,
foremost among the gods[The lords (pala) of the worlds (loka) are eight in number-Indra, Vahni (Agni), Yama, Nairrita, Varuna,
Maruta, Kubera and Isha (Ishana). Sometimes, Vayu is listed instead of Indra. However, since the reference here
seems to be to four lokapalas, one probably means Indra, Agni, Varuna and Yama.].

'Having seen Kubera's abode and the felled rakshasas, the brother told his seated brother Pandava[Yudhishthira and Bhima respectively.]. "O Bhi-
ma! O brave one! Whether you performed this evil act out of bravery or delusion, it is unworthy of you, like falsehood to a hermit. Learned ones well versed in dharma say that one should not perform deeds that are against the
wishes of a king. O Bhimasena! You have offended the thirty gods through your deed. O Partha! If one's mind is
attracted to evil, disregarding artha and dharma, it is certain that there will be fruits from that evil deed. If you wish
to do that which pleases me, do not ever act like this again." Kunti's son Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul and
knowledgeable about the different aspects of artha, spoke thus to his unvanquished brother. Having stopped speaking, the immensely energetic one began to reflect on the matter.

'Meanwhile, the rakshasas who had survived Bhimasena returned towards Kubera's abode. Travelling at great
speed, they swiftly reached Vaishravana's abode. They wailed in terrible distress, oppressed by fear of Bhimasena.
They had lost their arms and weapons. They were exhausted. Their garments were besmeared with blood. Their
hair was dishevelled. O king! They told the lord of the yakshas, "O lord of riches! O god! Armed with clubs,
maces, swords, javelins and lances, all the foremost warriors among the rakshasas have been killed. A man has
swiftly penetrated the mountain and has single-handedly killed masses of krodhavashas[Class of demons who are prone to (vasha) anger (krodha).] in battle. O lord of
riches! O god! The foremost among chief rakshasas and yakshas have been killed and have lost their senses and
their spirits. He has taken the mountain. We are the only ones who have escaped. Your friend Maniman has also
been killed. This act has been done by a single man. Now do what should be done hereafter." Having heard this,
the lord of all the masses of yakshas was enraged. His eyes became red with anger and he exclaimed, "How is that
possible!" On hearing of Bhima's second offence[The killing of Maniman.], the lord of riches and the lord of the yakshas was angered
and instructed his horses to be yoked. The beautiful chariot was yoked with supreme gandharva horses that possessed all the good qualities. They were clear in the eye and were swift and strong. They were adorned with many
gems. The chariot resembled a cloud and was as high as the peak of a mountain. The beautiful horses were yoked
to the chariot and were ready to fly, like arrows. They were excited and neighed at each other, as if foretelling victory. The illustrious king of the yakshas[The word used is Rajaraja. The word raja has several meanings, a yaksha being one of them. So Rajaraja is
the king of the yakshas, or Kubera.] ascended the grand chariot and the immensely radiant one departed,
praised by the gods and the gandharvas. As the great-souled lord of riches left, all the yakshas accompanied him.
Their eyes were red. They were golden in complexion. They were gigantic in form and immensely strong. They
were armed with weapons and had girded their swords. There were one crore[An ayuta is ten thousand and there were one thousand ayuta yakshas.] yakshas. They were brave and
indomitable in spirit. They surrounded their king.

'The Pandavas saw the lord of riches, great and pleasant to look at, approach and their body hair stood up. On
seeing Pandu's maharatha sons, great in spirit, with their bows and swords in their hands, Kubera was also delighted. With great speed, they[The yakshas.] alighted on the peak of the mountain like birds and stood around the lord of riches,
who was at the forefront. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that he[Kubera.] was delighted with the Pandavas, the yakshas and gandharvas, stood around indifferently[Controlling their anger.]. The great-souled Pandavas, Nakula, Sahadeva
and Dharma's son, who was always devoted to dharma, bowed down in obeisance before the illustrious lord of
riches. The maharathas knew in their hearts that they had committed a crime. Therefore, all of them surrounded the
lord of riches, hands joined in salutation. The handsome lord of riches was seated on his supreme Pushpaka[Pushpaka is Kubera's celestial chariot or vehicle (vimana).],
constructed by Vishvakarma[The architect of the gods.] and coloured along the sides. Thousands of giant yakshas and rakshasas, swift in
speed and with pointed ears, seated themselves below the seated one. Hundreds of gandharvas and masses of apsaras surrounded and waited on him, like Shatakratu surrounded by the gods. With a beautiful golden garland on
his head and with arrows, sword and bow in his hand, Bhimasena looked at the lord of riches. Despite being
wounded by the rakshasas, Bhima felt no fear or exhaustion. Even in that state, he looked at Kubera.

'On seeing Bhima standing there, desiring to fight and with sharp arrows, Naravahana told Dharma's son, "O
Partha! All the beings know that you have the welfare of beings in your heart. Therefore, with your relatives, live
on this mountain without any fear. O Pandava! Nor should you be angry because of Bhimasena's deed. They[The yakshas and the rakshasas.]
had already been killed by destiny and your brother was only the instrument. Nor should you be ashamed at this
violent deed of his. The destruction of the yakshas and the rakshasas had been determined by the gods earlier. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! I am not angry with Bhimasena. I am pleased. I have already satisfied myself with
this deed of Bhimasena's." Having said this to the king[Yudhishthira.], he spoke to Bhimasena, "O son[The word used is tata.]! O supreme among
the Kuru lineage! This will not prey on your mind. O Bhima! You have embarked on this act of violence for
Krishna's sake. You have ignored me and the gods. You have destroyed the yakshas and the rakshasas, with the
strength of your own arms. But even then, I am pleased with you. O Vrikodara! You have freed me from a terrible
curse. Earlier, for some reason, I was cursed by the supreme rishi Agastya, because he had been angered. Because
of your deed, I have now been freed from the curse following that transgression. O descendant of the Pandava lineage! O destroyer of enemies! Since I foresaw this grief, no crime attaches to you."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O illustrious one! Why were you cursed by the great-souled Agastya? O god! I wish to
hear about the reasons behind the curse. It seems to me extraordinary that the wise one's anger did not instantly
consume you, with all your armies and your attendants."

'Vaishravana replied, "O lord of men! There was a council of the gods in Kushavati. I was going there, surrounded by three hundred mahapadmas[Padma is a trillion. Mahapadma isn't specific, but is simply a very large number.] of terrible-looking yakshas, armed with various weapons. While going
there, I saw the supreme rishi Agastya, practising terrible austerities on the banks of the Yamuna. The place was
full of masses of birds and adorned with blossoming trees. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him
standing there with his arms raised and facing the sun, a mass of energy and as radiant as a blazing fire that has
been kindled well, my handsome friend Maniman, the lord of the rakshasas, was overcome by stupidity, ignorance,
insolence and delusion. From the sky, he spat on the maharshi's head. He[Agastya.] was angered and as though burning
up the directions, said, 'O lord of riches! Because this evil-minded one has insulted me and because he has injured
me while you have looked on, this friend of yours, with all these armies, will meet their deaths at the hands of a
human. O one with evil intelligence! You will also grieve, together with these armies. But you will be freed from
your sin when you encounter that human. However, this terrible curse will not touch the powerful sons and grandsons of these armies. Go now. They will follow your orders.' This was the curse that I had earlier received from
the supreme of rishis. O great king! Your brother Bhima has freed me from that."'
