Vaishampayana said, 'Not very far from where they[The Pandavas.] slept in the forest, a rakshasa named Hidimba lived on a shala[A very tall and stately tree.] tree. He was cruel, addicted to human flesh, very brave and very powerful, malformed, with yellow eyes, and
terrible and fearful to look at. He was thirsty and hungry and was looking around, when he happened to see them.
With his fingers extended upwards, he scratched the dry and unkempt hair on his head and yawning with his large
mouth repeatedly, looked at them. The evil eater of human flesh, with a huge form and great strength, smelt humans and told his sister, "After a long time, I will today devour my favourite food. Anticipating the pleasure, my
tongue is moist with saliva. My eight sharp-pointed teeth are impatient because they have had nothing to bite. I
will dip them into these bodies and the delicious flesh. I will attack the human throats and arteries. I will drink copious quantities of the warm, fresh and foaming blood. Go and find out who are sleeping in the forest. The strong
smell of humans alone pleases me. Kill those men and bring them to me. They are asleep in our territory and you
need not fear. We will both eat a lot of flesh from these humans the way we like it. Quickly do what I tell you." O
bull of the Bharata lineage! On hearing her brother's words, the rakshasi quickly went to where the Pandavas
were. On going there, she saw that the Pandavas and Pritha[Kunti.] were asleep, while the invincible Bhimasena was
awake.

'On seeing Bhimasena, whose shoulders were like a shala tree and who was unrivalled on earth in his beauty,
the rakshasi was filled with desire. She thought, "This dark, mighty-armed, lion-shouldered, greatly radiant, conch-
necked and lotus-eyed man is the right husband for me. I will not obey my brother's cruel orders. A wife's love is
stronger than affection for a brother. If he is killed, my brother's pleasure and mine will be satisfied for a short
while. But if I do not kill him, my gratification will be eternal." She could assume any form at will. She adopted a
beautiful human form and slowly came to where the mighty-armed Bhimasena was, like a shy creeper adorned in
divine ornaments. With a smile, she then addressed him in these words. "O bull among men! Where have you
come from and who are you? Who are these god-like men who are asleep here? O unblemished one! Who is this
tall, dark and delicate lady, who is asleep trustfully in this forest as if it was her own home? Do you not know that
this deep forest is inhabited by rakshasas? Here dwells the evil-minded rakshasa named Hidimba. O god-like man!
I have been sent here by my brother, that evil rakshasa, with the intention of eating your flesh. But, on seeing you,
like one who has emerged from the wombs of the gods, I honestly tell you that I desire no one but you as my husband. O learned one who knows the dharma! Please do that which is proper for me. My mind and body are overcome by desire. I wish to make you mine. Make me yours. O mighty-armed one! I will save you from the rakshasa
who eats human flesh. O unblemished one! Become my husband and we will live in the safety of the mountains. I
can travel in the sky and can go where I want. With me, you will find incomparable pleasure in those places."

'Bhimasena replied, "O rakshasi! For the sake of what power can a man leave his mother, elder brother and
those who are younger than him? What man like me would gratify his desire while leaving his sleeping mother and
brothers as food for a rakshasa?" The rakshasi replied, "I will do that which pleases you. Wake them all up. I will
save all of you from the desire of that man-eating rakshasa." Bhimasena said, "O rakshasi! I will not awaken my
mother and brothers, who are sleeping blissfully in this forest, out of fear for your evil-minded brother. O fearful
one! There is no rakshasa who can withstand my valour. O one with beautiful eyes! Nor can any man, gandharva
or yaksha. O slender lady! Go or stay, as you please. Or send your man-eating brother to me."'
