Janamejaya said, 'I have heard about the greatness of the illustrious paramatman, about how he was born in Dharma's house in the form of Nara and Narayana and about the ancient origin and creation of pinda by the great
boar. O brahmana! O unblemished one! I have heard how the modes of pravritti and nivritti were thought of. Earlier, you have also spoken about Hayashira, the devourer of havya and kavya, Vishnu's form that arose from the
north-eastern part of the great ocean. That was seen by the illustrious Brahma Parameshthi. O supreme among intelligent ones! When Hari, the upholder of the worlds, adopted that form in earlier times, what were the aspects of
power and greatness that had not been witnessed earlier? O sage! On seeing that sacred and infinitely energetic
form  of  Hayashira,  foremost  among  the  gods  and  never  witnessed  earlier,  what  did  Brahma  do?  O  brahmana!
Based on that ancient account, such a doubt has arisen. Why did the great being create this excellent form? O brahmana! You have purified us by telling us about these sacred accounts.'

Vaishampayana replied[This is what the text says. Since Janamejaya has asked the question, this should be Souti replying, not
Vaishampayana.], 'I will tell you everything about that ancient account, which is in conformity with the
Vedas. This  was  told  to  the  king  who  was  Dharma's  son  by  the  illustrious  Vyasa.  On  hearing  about  the  god
Harimedha[In this context, Harimedha can be taken as Vishnu's name, though strictly-speaking, in one of the manvantaras,
Vishnu was born as Hari, and he was then the son of Harimedha.] adopting the form of Hayashira, there was a doubt in the king's mind and he went and asked him[Vyasa.].
Yudhishthira asked, "Brahma saw the god in the form of Hayashira. Why did this happen and why did the god appear in such a form?"

'Vyasa said, "O lord of the earth! Everything in the world that possesses a body is made out of the five elements.
This creation results from the lord's intelligence. The great god and lord, Narayana, is the creator of the universe.
He is in the atmans of all beings. He is the granter of boons. He is with qualities and without qualities. O supreme
among kings! It is the unmanifest one who brings about the destruction of beings. Listen. First, the earth was submerged in water and everything was one large ocean. Water merged into light and light merged into the wind. The
wind  merged  into  space  and  space  merged  into  the  mind.  Mind merged into the manifest[Meaning consciousness.]  and  the  manifest
merged into the unmanifest[Meaning Prakriti.]. The unmanifest merged into Purusha and Purusha merged into the one who pervaded everything[The paramatman.]. There was darkness everywhere and nothing could be seen. The brahman arose from the darkness. He created himself from that foundation of darkness. With the desire to create the universe, he assumed the
form of Purusha. This form is known as Aniruddha and is also known as Pradhana. O supreme among kings! He is
also known as the manifest and as a combination of the three qualities. With knowledge as his companion, the lord
is also known as Vishvaksena or Hari. Immersed in yoga, he slept on the waters. He thought of creating the universe, with wonderful and diverse attributes. While thinking of creation, he remembered his own great qualities.
Consciousness was generated then and this was the auspicious and four-faced Brahma. The illustrious Hiranyagarbha is the grandfather of all the worlds. He possessed eyes that are like a lotus and he emerged from a lotus that
was in Aniruddha[A lotus that blooms from Aniruddha's navel.]. The eternal and radiant one was seated on the flower with the one thousand petals. Wishing
to create the worlds, the lord looked at the water that was on all sides. Basing himself on sattva, Parameshthi created the different categories of beings. Before this, Narayana had placed two drops of water, invested with excellent
qualities, into the petals of the lotus, which were as bright as the rays of the sun. The illustrious Achyuta is without
beginning and without end. He looked at those two drops of water. One of these was beautiful and radiant and
looked like honey. On Narayana's instructions, Madhu, based on tamas qualities, was generated from this[Madhu means honey, as well as sweet and pleasant.]. The
other drop was hard, and Kaitabha, based on rajas qualities, was generated from this. With the qualities of tamas
and rajas, these two superior ones advanced. They were powerful and held clubs in their hands. They roamed
around inside the stalk of the lotus. Inside the lotus, they saw the infinitely radiant Brahma. He was engaged in creating the first forms of the four beautiful Vedas. The supreme asuras saw the forms of the Vedas. While Brahma
looked on, they violently seized the Vedas. Having seized the eternal Vedas, the best among the danavas quickly
entered the nether regions, inside the waters of the great ocean.

'"When the Vedas were stolen, Brahma was immersed in grief. Deprived of the Vedas, he spoke these words to
the lord. 'The Vedas are my supreme sight. The Vedas are my supreme strength. The Vedas are my supreme refuge.
The Vedas are the supreme brahman. All my Vedas have been stolen by the powerful danavas. With the Vedas having been stolen, the world is enveloped in darkness. Without the Vedas, how will I engage in the task of creating
the worlds? I am suffering from a great grief because my Vedas have been stolen. My heart is afflicted and I am
consumed by a great misery. Who will raise me from this ocean of grief into which I have been submerged? Who
will save the destroyed Vedas and do  something agreeable for  me?' O  supreme among kings! These were the
words that Brahma spoke. O supreme among intelligent ones! The intelligent one thought of some hymns in praise
of Hari. Joining his hands in salutation, the lord bowed down and approached the supreme one. He chanted, 'I bow
down before you. You are Brahma's heart. I bow down before you. You were created before me. You are the origin
of the worlds. You are the best in the universe. You are the lord who is the store of sankhya and yoga. You are the
creator of the manifest and the unmanifest. You are established on the path of tranquility. You are the enjoyer of
the universe. You are inside all creatures. You are without birth. I have been generated through your favours. O
Svayambhu! You are the abode of the worlds. My first birth, honoured by all the brahmanas, was from your mind.
My ancient and second birth was from your eyes. It is through your favours that my great and third birth occurred
from your speech. O lord! It is the truth that my fourth birth was from your ears. O one without decay! It is the
truth that my fifth birth was from your nose. It is true that you thought of my sixth birth from an egg. O infinitely
powerful lord! This, my seventh birth, has happened from a lotus. O one who is devoid of the three qualities! From
one cycle of creation to another cycle of creation, I have been your son. You are famous as Pundarikaksha. You are
Pradhana, who has thought of the qualities. You are the natural lord. You are Svayambhu and Purushottama. I have
been created by you and the Vedas are my eyes. The Vedas, which are my eyes, have been stolen. Though I have
been born, I am blind. Please awake. Give my eyes back to me. I am dear to you. You are dear to me.' The illustrious Purusha, who faces every direction, was thus praised.

'"To accomplish the task of recovering the Vedas, he raised himself from his sleep. Using his powers, he assumed a second form. He assumed a form with an excellent nose and it was as radiant as the moon. The lord who
is the abode of all the Vedas assumed the auspicious form of Hayashira. The firmament, with its nakshatras and
stars, became his head. His long and flowing hair was as radiant as the rays of the sun. The sky and the nether regions constituted his ears. The earth was his forehead. The sacred and great rivers, Ganga and Sarasvati, were his
eyebrows. The sun and the moon were his eyes. The evening was said to be his nose. The syllable 'Om' was his
mind and the lightning was his tongue. O king! The ancestors, who drink soma, were known as his teeth. Goloka
and Brahmaloka[The worlds of Vishnu and Brahma respectively.] became the great-souled one's lips. O king! The terrible night of universal destruction, which
is beyond the three qualities, became his neck. He created this form of Hayashira and it was covered with many
kinds of other forms. The god who was the lord of the universe disappeared and penetrated the nether regions.
Having entered the water, he resorted to supreme yoga. Using accomplished techniques of pronunciation, he uttered the syllable 'Om'. This sound was pleasant in every way and echoed everywhere. It possessed all the beneficial qualities and reverberated in the nether regions. Having decided to come back for the Vedas, the asuras flung
them down into the nether regions and swiftly proceeded to the spot where the sound was coming from. O king!
Meanwhile, Hari, the god who was in the form of Hayashira, picked up all the Vedas from the nether regions. He
gave them back to Brahma and assumed his natural form again. Hayashira was the abode of the Vedas and he established this form of Hayashira in the north-eastern parts of the great ocean. O king! The danavas, Madhu and
Kaitabha, could not find anyone and quickly returned to the spot. However, they found that the place where they
had flung the Vedas was empty. Those two supremely powerful ones resorted to great speed. They quickly raised
themselves from the nether regions and saw the lord Purusha, who had originally created them. He was based in
the form of Aniruddha and he was as pure in complexion as the fair moon. The valiant one had again resorted to
yoga and was sleeping on the waters. He had manifested himself in this form and was sleeping on the waters. He
was sleeping on the hood of a serpent[Shesha or Ananta.] and seemed to be enveloped in a covering of flames. The beautiful lord
was full of sattva and without any blemish. On seeing him, the Indras among the danavas laughed loudly. Full of
rajas and tamas, they said, 'This Purusha is fair and he is lying down, immersed in sleep. There is no doubt that he
is the one who has stolen the Vedas from the nether regions. Whom does he belong to? Who is he? Who belongs to
him? Why is he sleeping on a snake?' While they were speaking in this way, Hari was awakened. The god Purushottama realized that they wished to fight with him. He saw that the two Indras among rakshasas had made up
their minds to fight. A battle commenced between them on one side and Narayana on the other. Madhu and Kaitabha were full of rajas and tamas. To please Brahma, Madhusudana slew them[Madhusudana means the destroyer of Madhu.]. Purushottama quickly killed the
ones who had stolen the Vedas and dispelled Brahma's grief. Brahma was again revered and surrounded by the
Vedas that had been stolen. Without any sense of ownership, he created the worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects. He[Narayana.] gave the grandfather the powerful intelligence required for the creation of the worlds. Having
given  this  to  the  god,  Hari  went  away.  It  is  thus  that  Hari  assumed  the  form  of  Hayashira  and  killed  the  two
danavas. He assumed that form so that the dharma of pravritti could be propagated again. Thus did the immensely
fortunate Hari assume the form of Hayashira. This form of the lord who grants boons is regarded as the most ancient. If a brahmana always hears it, or recites it, his studies will never be destroyed. Using fierce austerities, the
rishi Panchala worshipped the god who assumed the form of Hayashira and learnt shiksha, following the path instructed by Rama. O king! I have recounted the story of Hayashira to you. This is an ancient account that is in conformity with the Vedas and you had asked me about it. To accomplish different kinds of tasks, the god assumes different kinds of forms. Using his atman, the god creates himself and performs those different tasks.

'"He is the store of the Vedas. He is prosperous. He is the store of austerities. The powerful lord Hari is yoga,
sankhya and the brahman. Narayana is the supreme Vedas. The sacrifices constitute Narayana's atman. Narayana
represents  supreme  austerities.  Narayana  is  the  supreme  objective.  Narayana  is  the  supreme  truth.  Amrita  is
Narayana's atman. Naryana is the supreme dharma and from this, it is extremely rare to return[If one has obtained Narayana, rebirth is rare. This is a reference to nivritti.]. Dharma with the
characteristics of pravritti has Narayana as its soul. Scent, said to be the best attribute of the earth, has Narayana as
its soul. O king! Taste, the quality of water, has Narayana as its soul. Form, the quality of light, is said to have
Narayana as its soul. Touch, the quality of the wind, is said to have Narayana as its soul. Sound, resulting from
space, also has Narayana as its soul. Mind, with the quality of the unmanifest[Prakriti.], has Narayana as its soul. Time,
computed  through  the  measurement  of  the  stellar  bodies,  is  nothing  but  the  supreme  Narayana.  The supreme
Narayana is the deities of Kirti, Shri and Lakshmi[Respectively, deeds, beauty and prosperity.]. Sankhya and yoga are the supreme Narayana and they have
Narayana as their soul. He is the cause as Purusha. He is also the cause as Pradhana. All deeds are in his nature. He
is the cause behind the gods. He is enumerated as the five kinds of causes[This proably refers to the five sheaths that cover the atman. These are annamaya (related to food), pranamaya
(related to energy), manomaya (related to the mind), vijnanamaya (related to knowledge) and anandamaya (related to bliss).]. Hari is there in all devotion. He is the
truth that the curious ones seek. He is the reason that faces all the directions. He is the single truth. He is the great
yogi. He is the lord Hari Narayana. He is the one Brahma, the worlds, the great-souled rishis, the practitioners of
sankhya and yoga and the ascetics seek to know. The learned ones know of him as Keshava. Everything that is
done in all the worlds for the sake of gods and ancestors, the donations that are given, the great austerities that are
observed-all these have the lord Vishnu as their refuge. He has determined the ordinances for these. He resides in
all creatures and is said to be Vasudeva[Based on the root vas, meaning, reside or dwell.]. He is eternal. He is the supreme maharshi. He possesses the greatest
power. He is beyond qualities. He is without the three qualities. When the occasion arises, he acts so as to quickly
bring about a union of the qualities. The great-souled ones cannot comprehend his progress. No one can see his
movements. Maharshis who are restrained and possess knowledge in their atmans always see the Purusha, who is
beyond the qualities."'
