Sanjaya said, "O king! Drona's son possessed supreme speed. He displayed his dexterity with weapons and struck
Bhimasena with an arrow. He then again struck him with another ninety sharp arrows in his inner organs. He was
light in the use of his hands and had seen and was knowledgeable about where the weak spots were. O king! Having been struck by the sharp arrows shot by Drona's son, Bhimasena was resplendent in that battle, like the sun
with its rays. Pandava shot one thousand well-aimed arrows and enveloping Drona's son, emitted a roar like a lion.
O king! In the encounter, Drona's son countered Pandava with one hundred arrows and smiling, struck him in the
forehead with an iron arrow. O king! Bearing that arrow on his forehead, Pandava looked like a proud and horned
rhinoceros in the forest. While Drona's son was making his efforts in the battle, the valiant Bhima also seemed to
smile and struck him in the forehead with three iron arrows. With those arrows stuck to his forehead, the brahmana
was resplendent. He looked like a supreme mountain with three peaks, drenched during the rains. Drona's son
struck Pandava with one hundred arrows, but could not make him tremble, like the wind against a mountain.
Drona's son used hundreds of other sharp arrows in the battle. However, he could not make the cheerful Pandava
tremble, like the wind against a mountain. The maharathas shrouded each other with many other showers of arrows. They were proud in the battle and roaming around on their chariots, the brave ones were resplendent. They
blazed like a couple of suns that had arisen for destroying beings. Their supreme arrows were like rays and they
scorched each other with these. In that great battle, they acted and counteracted each other. Without any fear, they
made efforts to act and counteract. The maharathas roamed around in that battle, like tigers. The invincible arrows
were like the teeth and the terrible bows were like the mouths. With nets of arrows on all sides, they became invisible. It was as if the sun or the moon in the sky was enveloped by a net of clouds. But in a short instant, those two
scorchers of enemies became visible again, like the moon and the sun in the sky, freed from the net of clouds.

' "Drona's son placed Vrikodara on his right and showered down hundreds of sharp arrows, like rain pouring
down on a mountain. However, Bhima was not ready to tolerate signs of his enemy being victorious. O king! Remaining on the right, Pandava began to execute circular motions, advancing and retreating. In that great battle,
there was a tumultuous encounter between them. In that spot, they traversed along various circular paths. They
drew their bows back to the full extent and struck each other with arrows. The maharathas made the best efforts to
kill each other. In that battle, they used their arrows to try and deprive each other of their chariots. Drona's maharatha son released many great weapons and in that encounter, Pandava destroyed them with his own weapons. O
great king! There was an extremely fierce battle with those weapons. It was as if there was a tremendous clash between the planets, for the sake of destroying beings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those arrows were
swiftly released and clashed against each other. They illuminated all the directions and the soldiers on every side.
Because of the large numbers of arrows, the sky looked terrible. O king! It was as if meteors were descending to
destroy beings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As the torrents of arrows clashed against each other, sparks of
fire were generated and those blazing flames consumed both the armies. O great king! The siddhas[The siddhas are a semi-divine species, inhabiting the area between the
sun and the earth and 88,000 in number.] descended
there and said, 'This encounter is superior to all other encounters. All other battles do not amount to one-sixteenth
of this[The text uses the word kala. The moon has sixteen kalas or phases and
sixteen kalas constitute the whole.]. Such an encounter has not happened earlier, nor will it happen again. These two lords are knowledgeable and terrible in their valour. Bhima is terrible in his valour and the other one is skilled in the use of weapons.
They represent the essence of valour and great is their skill. They are stationed in the battle like two Destroyers.
They are like two Rudras or like two suns. In this battle, those two tigers among men have terrible forms, like two
Yamas.' At that time, we repeatedly heard these words spoken by the siddhas. Among the assembled denizens of
heaven, there were roars like lions, on witnessing the extraordinary and unthinkable deeds performed by them in
that battle. O king! Having injured each other in that encounter, those two brave ones glanced towards each other,
their eyes dilated with rage. Their eyes were red with anger. Their lips trembled in rage. They gnashed their teeth
in wrath. They bit their lips in ire. The maharathas enveloped each other with showers of arrows. In that encounter,
the arrows were like rain pouring from clouds. The weapons were like lightning. The maharathas pierced each other's standards and charioteers. They pierced each other's horses and struck each other. O great king! In that great
encounter, they picked up two arrows and swiftly released them towards each other, wishing to kill each other. O
great king! At the heads of the two armies, those two arrows blazed and struck each other, with an irresistible force
that was like that of the vajra. They severely wounded each other through the force of those arrows. Those two,
who were extremely valiant, sank down on the floors of their chariots. O king! While all the kshatriyas looked on,
knowing that Drona's son had become unconscious, his charioteer bore him away from the field of battle. O king!
In similar fashion, Pandava, the scorcher of enemies, repeatedly lost his senses and his charioteer bore him away
on the chariot." '
