Vaishampayana said, 'When the mighty-armed Keshava heard these words of Bhima, which were without precedence in terms of their mildness, he laughed. The mountains seemed to have become light. The fire seemed to have
become cold. That is what Rama's younger brother, Shouri, the wielder of the Sharnga bow, thought[Rama is Balarama. Shouri is Krishna's name.]. Vrikodara
Bhimasena was seated, overcome with compassion. To incite him, like a wind fanning the fire, he said, "O Bhimasena! On other occasions, you have advocated war. You have desired to suppress the cruel sons of Dhritarashtra,
who find delight in murders. O scorcher of enemies! You do not sleep. You lie down and remain awake, with your
face downwards. You have always spoken terrible, violent and harsh words. When you sigh, your breath burns like
the fire. O Bhima! Your mind is not at peace, like a fire with smoke. You lie down alone and groan, like a weak
person unable to bear a load. People who do not know the reason think that you are mad. O Bhima! You are like a
roaming elephant, which uproots trees, groans and stamps down on the ground with its feet. You find no pleasure
in the company of people. O Pandava! You stay away from them. Whether it is night or day, you do not welcome
anyone. You suddenly smile, or weep because of a mysterious reason. You are sometimes seated, resting your head
on your thighs. Or you are seen, sometimes frowning, or licking your lips. O Bhima! All this is because you are
angry. 'As certainly as the sun rises in the east with its light, as certainly as it sets in the west, circling the pole star
with its rays, thus do I swear and there will be no deviation from my vow. I will attack the intolerant Duryodhana
and kill him with a club.' This is what you swore on your club earlier, in the midst of your brothers. O scorcher of
enemies! Is it the same mind that now turns towards pacification? Now that the time for war has arrived, those who
wished war are turning away. O Bhima! Are you frightened? O Partha! Or is it that you have seen portents, when
you are asleep or when you are awake, and those make you turn towards peace? You do not show any manliness in
you. You are like a eunuch. You have been overcome by cowardice. That is the reason your mind has swerved.
Your heart trembles and your mind is full of despair. Your thighs are paralysed. That is the reason you want peace.
O Partha! The minds of mortal men are inconstant and fickle, like the kernel of a shalmali tree that is swayed by
the wind. This distorted intelligence is as rare in you as human speech is in cows. The minds of the sons of Pandu
will be immersed, like a boat in water. That Bhimasena should speak words like these, is as extraordinary to me as
mountains moving around. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Look back at your own deeds and the lineage into
which you have been born. Arise! Do not yield to despair. O brave one! Be steady. O scorcher of enemies! This
lassitude is not like you. A kshatriya does not obtain that which he does not seize through his energy."'
