Vaishampayana said, 'After Matsya followed Trigarta to recover his animal, Duryodhana and his advisers invaded
Virata's kingdom. Bhishma, Drona, Karna, Kripa who was supremely skilled in weapons, Drona's son[Ashvatthama.], Soubala,
the lord Duhshasana, Vivimshati, Vikarna, the valorous Chitrasena, Durmukha, Duhsaha and other maharathas invaded King Virata's kingdom of Matsya. They swiftly captured the cattle stations and plundered the riches of cattle. Encircling them on every side with a large collection of chariots, the Kurus seized sixty thousand cows. The
cowherds were killed by those maharathas in that terrible encounter and a great lamentation arose. The chief of the
cowherds was terrified. In great affliction, he quickly mounted a chariot and left for the city. Entering the city, he
went to the king's residence. Descending swiftly from the chariot, he entered and recounted what had happened.

'He saw Matsya's insolent son, named Bhuminjaya, there. He told him everything about how the animals of the
kingdom had been plundered. "The Kurus are taking away sixty thousand cows. Cattle bring prosperity to the
kingdom. Arise and bring them back. O prince! If you have our welfare in mind, swiftly march out yourself. King
Matysa left you in charge of the empty kingdom. In the midst of the courtiers, that lord of men takes pride in you.

'My son is like me. He is brave and is an extender of the lineage. He is a warrior who is skilled in the use of arrows and weapons. My son is always courageous.' Make those words of that Indra among men come true. O
supreme among those who possesses animals! Restrain the Kurus and recover the animals. Burn them down with
your terrible shafts and energetic arrows. Unleash arrows with golden shafts, with smooth tufts, from your bow.
Destroy the enemies, like the leader of a herd of elephants. Your bow is like a veena, the string is the chord. The
handle is the base. The loops are the two blocks at the end. The arrows are the notes and strike them in the midst of
the enemies. Your steeds are as white as silver. Let them be yoked to the chariot. O lord! Your pennant has the emblem of a golden lion. Let it be raised. Your arrows have golden shafts. They are smooth at the tip. Let them be released from your skilful hands and they will overshadow these kings like the sun and reduce their lives. Defeat all
the Kurus in battle, like the wielder of the vajra[Indra is the wielder of the vajra.] against the asuras. Having attained great fame, return again to
the city. You are the son of the lord of Matsya. You are the supreme refuge of the kingdom. Let all of us who reside
in the kingdom find refuge in you today." Having been thus addressed by these terrible words in the midst of the
women, he[Bhuminjaya. Bhuminjaya is more commonly known by the name of Uttara. Virata had a son named Uttara and a
daughter named Uttaraa, the latter being the one whom Arjuna taught. Both Uttara and Uttaraa are being written as
Uttara, but the context makes clear whether it is the son or the daughter.] proudly spoke these words in the inner quarters.'
