'Lomasha said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Kounteya! O king! You have now left behind the mountains Ushirabija, Mainaka and Shveta and also the mountain Kala. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Ganga is
resplendent here in seven streams. This region is beautiful and sacred. Agni always burns here. But this cannot be
now seen by a mere man. But if you are collected and concentrate your minds, you will be able to see these tirthas.
We will now ascend Mount Shveta and Mount Mandara. The yaksha Manichara, and Kubera, the king of the yak-
shas, dwell there. O king! O best of men! Eighty-eight thousand gandharvas who are swift in travelling and four
times that number of kimpurushas and yakshas, in many different forms and wielding many different weapons,
wait upon Manibhadra, the Indra of the yakshas. Their prosperity is immense. Their speed is equal to that of the
wind. They are certainly capable of dislodging the king of the gods from his seat. O son! This region is secret and
is protected by powerful yatudhanas[A yatudhana is an evil spirit or demon.]. O Partha! These mountains are difficult of access. Therefore, use
supreme concentration. Kubera has other terrible advisers and rakshasas as friends. O Kounteya! We will meet
them. Therefore, concentrate your valour. O king! Mount Kailasa extends for six hundred yojanas. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The gods assemble there, in that extensive region. O Kounteya! There are innumerable yak-
shas, rakshasas and kinnaras, serpents, divine birds[The word used is Suparna. Suparna is one of Garuda's names, though the text uses Suparna in the plural.
Therefore, these are semi-divine birds, more than ordinary birds.] and gandharvas, in the direction of Kubera's abode. O
Partha! O king! Protected by me and through Bhimasena's strength, and with your own austerities and control, mix
with them now. May King Varuna and Yama, victorious in battle, and Ganga and Yamuna, and the mountains give
you safety. 'O goddess Ganga[Lomasha is reciting this invocation to Ganga.]! I hear your sounds from the top of Indra's golden mountain. O fortunate one!
Protect him from these mountains, this Indra among men who is honoured by all those of the Ajamidha
lineage[Ajamidha was a common ancestor of the Kouravas and the Pandavas.]. O daughter of the mountains! This king is about to enter these mountains. Therefore, grant him your
protection.'"

'Yudhishthira said, "Lomasha's confusion is unprecedented[Referring to Lomasha's nervousness.]. All of you guard Krishna and do not be careless. His view is that this region is difficult of access. Therefore, let us observe complete cleanliness."'

Vaishampayana said, 'He then told the greatly valorous Bhima, "O Bhimasena! Protect Krishna carefully. O
son[The word used is tata, which can affectionately be used for anyone who is younger or inferior.]! Whether Arjuna is far or whether he is near, it is you Krishna resorts to in times of fear." Then the great-
souled one went to the twins and inhaled the fragrance of their hands and embraced their bodies. In a voice choking with tears, the king said, "Do not be afraid. Tread carefully."'
