Vaishampayana said, 'When the Parthas entered, the people, the residents of the city, wished to see them and assembled in many thousands. The royal road and the squares were decorated and beautiful. O king! It was like the
giant ocean swelling when the moon rises. The large houses along the royal road were bejewelled. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Full of women, they seemed to tremble at the weight. Because they were bashful, they softly
praised Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Arjuna and the two Pandavas who were Madri's sons. "O Panchali! You are
blessed and fortunate, since you serve those best among men, like Goutami tending to the maharshis[Goutami means Ahalya, the sage Goutama's wife. There was a drought and there was no food. Because of a
boon, Ahalya had plenty of food and tended to the suffering maharshis.]. O beautiful one! You have followed your vows and your deeds have not been fruitless." O great king! At that time, the
women praised Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] thus. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of the delighted sounds of these
words of praise, the city resounded. Having been thus addressed, Yudhishthira passed through the royal road and
arrived at the ornamented and radiant royal palace. All the ordinary people, the residents of the city and of the
countryside, came there from different sides and spoke words that were pleasant to the ear. "O Indra among kings!
O destroyer of enemies! It is through good fortune that you have defeated the enemy. It is through good fortune
that you have regained the kingdom, through dharma and strength. O great king! May you rule over the kingdom
for one hundred autumns. O king! Protect the subjects through dharma, as Indra does over the thirty gods." At the
gates of the royal residence, he was worshipped in this auspicious way. In every direction, he received benedictions from the affectionate brahmanas. The king entered the palace, which was like the residence of the king of the
gods. Hearing those victorious sounds, he descended from his chariot.

'Entering inside, he approached the prosperous gods[Clearly referring to some kind of temple inside the palace.] and worshipped all of them with jewels and fragrant garlands. The prosperous and immensely illustrious one again emerged. He saw the handsome brahmanas who presented themselves. He was surrounded by those brahmanas, who wished to pronounce benedictions over him. He
was as resplendent as the sparkling moon, surrounded by a large number of stars. In the prescribed fashion,
Kounteya honoured the brahmanas. O Indra among kings! With the preceptor Dhoumya[The family priest of the Pandavas.] and his eldest father[Dhritarashtra.]
at the forefront, he cheerfully worshipped them with sweets, jewels, large quantities of gold, cattle, garments and
many other objects that they desired. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Auspicious sounds arose and reached
up to the sky. These auspicious sounds were pleasant to hear and generated delight among the well-wishers. O
king! The brahmanas were learned in the Vedas and their chants resounded like the noise made by swans. It was as
if Bharati could be heard there, with meanings, lines and syllables[The use of the word Bharati causes a problem of interpretation. In a straightforward way, Bharati is nothing but
speech personified, especially Sanskrit speech. Meaning is artha, a line or quarter of a shloka is pada and syllable is an akshara. But does Bharati mean a reference to the goddess Sarasvati, especially since swans have been
mentioned? This is possible, but not necessarily true.]. There was the roar of drums and the beautiful sound of conch shells. O king! Those sounds were heard and proclaimed the news of victory.

'When the brahmanas there became quiet again, the rakshasa Charvaka, disguising himself as a brahmana,
spoke to the king[There was a passing reference to Charvaka in Section 77 (Volume 7). There was a famous Charvaka, the
founder of a materialist and atheist school of philosophy. This is not the famous Charvaka. The word charvaka
means someone who is beautiful in speech.]. He was a friend of Duryodhana's and was in the form of a mendicant. He was a samkhya[A specific type of mendicant, not to be confused with the samkhya school of philosophy.].
He had a tuft of hair on his head. He held triple staff in his hand[A rod with three staffs tied together is the mark of a mendicant.]. He was proud and without any fear. He was
surrounded by all those brahmanas, who wished to pronounce their benedictions. O Indra among kings! There
were thousands of others who had immersed themselves in austerities and rituals. Without taking their permission,
the evil and wicked one censured the great-souled Pandavas and spoke to the king. "All these brahmanas have
asked me to speak on their behalf. O wicked king! Shame on you. You have slain your kin. O Kounteya! Having
caused the destruction of kin, what will you gain from the kingdom? Having slain your elders, it is better to be
dead than to be alive." On hearing the terrible words of the rakshasa, the brahmanas were distressed. Afflicted by
those words, they roared. O lord of the earth! Together with King Yudhishthira, all the brahmanas were ashamed
and greatly anxious and then fell silent. Yudhishthira replied, "I am bowing down before you. Show me your
favours. You should not reprimand me. I have just recovered from a catastrophe." O king! O lord of the earth! All
the brahmanas shouted, "O king! These are not our words. May you be prosperous." Those brahmanas were
learned in the Vedas and had cleansed themselves through austerities. Through the sight of their wisdom, they recognized him[They saw through Charvaka's disguise.]. The brahmanas said, "This is Duryodhana's friend and a rakshasa named Charvaka. In the form of
a mendicant, he is trying to ensure his welfare[Though Duryodhana is dead, trying to ensure Duryodhana's welfare by maligning Yudhishthira.]. O one with dharma in your soul! We have not spoken in that
way. Do not have any fear on that account. Let good fortune wait on you and your brothers." Senseless with anger,
all the brahmanas shouted[The word used in the text is humkara. This means to utter the sound hum.]. They were pure and by censuring the wicked rakshasa, killed him. He was burnt and
brought down by the energy of the ones who knew about the brahman. It was like the shoots of a tree charred by
the great Indra's vajra. Having been honoured, the brahmanas congratulated the king and departed. With his well-
wishers, the Pandava king was delighted.

'Vasudeva said, "O father[The word used is tata. This means father, but is affectionately used towards anyone who is older or senior. Yudhishthira was older than Krishna.]! In this world, brahmanas have always been revered by me. They are like gods
roaming around on earth. They have poison in their speech, but are also easy to please. O father! In ancient times,
in krita yuga, there was a rakshasa named Charvaka. O mighty-armed one! For many years, he tormented himself
through austerities in Badari[Badarikashrama.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Brahma repeatedly offered him boons and he
opted for the boon that he should have nothing to fear from all beings. The lord of the universe granted him the
supreme boon of fearlessness from all beings, as long as he did not disrespect brahmanas. Having obtained the
boon, the rakshasa, immensely strong, terrible in his deeds and infinitely valorous, began to oppress the gods. The
gods united and told Brahma, 'His strength is unnatural. Ensure the rakshasa's death.' O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! He told the gods, 'I have already thought of a means, so that he confronts his death soon. O king[Since this is within Brahma's quote, it doesn't belong.]! He
will be a friend to a king named Duryodhana. Because he will be bound down by affection towards him[Towards Duryodhana.], he will
insult brahmanas. The brahmanas will be incensed at the injury he causes brahmanas. Through the strength of their
speech, they will destroy the wicked one and he will perish.' The rakshasa has been killed by the curse of brahmanas and is lying down. O best among kings! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Do not sorrow over Charvaka.
O king! Know that all of them have been slain because of the dharma of kshatriyas. Those bulls among kshatriyas
were brave and great-souled and have gone to heaven. O one without decay! You must now do what is good. You
should not show weakness. Kill the enemy. Protect the subjects. Sustain the brahmanas."'
