'Lomasha said, "O Kounteya! Having completed the studies and rituals and having collected firewood, Bharadvaja
entered his hermitage. On seeing him, all the fires used to stand up to greet him. But because his son had been
killed, they did not stand up then. On witnessing this distortion in the agnihotra, the great ascetic spoke to the blind
shudra house-guard who was seated there. 'O shudra! Why are the fires not delighted on seeing me? Nor are you,
as you used to earlier[The guard remained seated and did not stand up on seeing Bharadvaja.]. Is everything well in the hermitage? Is there any chance that my dim-witted son has gone
to Raibhya? Tell me all this quickly. My mind is not at peace.' The shudra replied, 'Indeed, your dim-witted son
did go to Raibhya. He is now lying dead, killed by a powerful rakshasa. He was pursued by the rakshasa with an
upraised spear. But as a doorkeeper, I restrained him at the door of the place where the fire is kept. He desired water, but was certainly in an unclean state[Because Yavakrita's kamandalu had been stolen, he could not clean himself.]. He was then swiftly killed by the rakshasa with the upraised spear.'

'"On hearing these unpleasant words of the shudra, Bharadvaja grasped his dead son and lamented in great misery. 'You performed austerities for the welfare of brahmanas, so that the Vedas not studied by brahmanas might become manifest in you. Your conduct towards the great-souled brahmanas was always driven by welfare. You exhibited no sin towards all beings. Nevertheless, you became harsh. O son! I prohibited you from seeing the place
where Raibhya lives, because it is like Yama, the bringer of death. But you went to that mean place. The immensely energetic one knows me to be old and that you were my only son. But that supremely ill-minded one fell prey to
anger. Because of Raibhya's deed, I am now mourning for my son. O son! Because of your loss and your death, I
will give up my life, the most precious thing on earth. Just as I am giving up my body out of sorrow for my son,
Raibhya's eldest son will soon kill him, though he will be innocent. Happy are men to whom sons have not been
born. They roam happily, without having to grieve over a son. Who can be more evil than those who, grieving over
the death of their sons and miserable and disturbed in senses, curse their dearest friends? Having seen my son
dead, I have cursed my best friend. Where is there a second one who confronts such calamity?' Having thus
lamented in many ways, Bharadvaja cremated his son. Later, he himself entered a fire that had been kindled well."'
