Bhishma said, "Having spoken these words, the greatly ascetic brahmana rishi, Shuka, established himself in
that success and cast away the four kinds of creatures[Born from wombs, born from eggs, born from sweat and from plants and trees.]. He cast aside the eight kinds of tamas and discarded
the five kinds of rajas[This means the qualities. The eight qualities of tamas are lack of consciousness, confusion, delusion, lack of understanding, sleep, carelessness, procrastination and blindness towards consequences. There are actually nine
qualities of rajas and these are faith, generosity, enjoyment, enterprise, desire, anger, pride, malice and calumny.]. The intelligent one also abandoned sattva and this was extraordinary. In that state, he was
always without any qualities and was divested of all signs. He was like a blazing fire without any smoke and established himself in the brahman. Meteors showered down. The directions were aflame. The earth trembled. At that
time,  all  these  manifestations  were  extraordinary.  Trees  released  their  branches  and  mountains  their  summits.
There were loud sounds, as if the Himalaya mountains were being shattered. The one with the thousand rays[The sun.]
was no longer radiant. The fire did not blaze. The ponds, rivers and oceans were agitated. Vasava showered down
water that was tasty and fragrant. Winds began to blow, with auspicious and divine scents. He saw two divine and
unmatched peaks, rising from the Himalayas and Meru. They were sacred and close to each other. One was white,
the other was yellow. One was made of silver, the other was made of gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Each was one hundred yojanas in expanse, both in height and in breadth. As he headed towards the northern direction, he saw these beautiful peaks. Without any fear in his mind, Shuka descended on them. At this, the two mountain peaks were cleft into two. O great king! That sight was extraordinary. The mountain peaks suddenly withdrew.
Those supreme among mountains were unable to impede his progress. All the residents of heaven created a great
roar in heaven. And so did the gandharvas and the rishis who resided in the mountains. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At the sight of Shuka dividing the peaks and proceeding, roars of 'Wonderful! Wonderful!' arose everywhere. He was worshipped by the gods, the gandharvas, the rishis, the large numbers of yakshas and rakshasas and
innumerable vidyadharas. In every direction, the firmament was strewn with celestial flowers. O great king! This is
what happened when Shuka descended. As Shuka, with dharma in his soul, travelled above, he saw groves with
flowering tree, and the beautiful Mandakini flowed through that region. Large numbers of apsaras were engaged in
bathing there. Their bodies were naked and without garments. Because Shuka was without a form, they were not
ashamed of their nudity.

'"In due course, his father learnt about the excellent route that he had taken. Overcome with affection, he followed him from the rear. Shuka had ascended up into the sky, beyond the region traversed by the wind. Displaying
his own powers, he had identified himself with all creatures[That is, he had identified himself with the brahman.]. The immensely ascetic Vyasa resorted to the same
fierce mode of great yoga. In a short while, he reached the spot where Shuka had descended. He saw the two
mountain peaks that Shuka had shattered as he had proceeded. The rishis praised the deeds of his son. Using his
learning, for a long time, he called out Shuka's name. The sounds of his own father's voice resounded in the three
worlds. By then, Shuka had become one with everything. He was in the soul of everything and faced every direction. The one with dharma in his soul replied in an echo, with the sound of 'Bho[It is impossible to translate 'Bho'. A loose translation would be 'Hello'.]'. All the worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects, replied loudly, resounding with the single syllable of 'Bho'. Even today, when separate
sounds are uttered in mountains, caves and slopes, that echo of 'Bho' is heard, as if replying to Shuka. Having exhibited his powers, Shuka disappeared. He abandoned all the qualities, the attributes of sound and the others. He
attained the supreme end. On witnessing the greatness of his infinitely energetic son, he[Vyasa.] sat down on the slopes
of the mountain and began to think about his son. Large numbers of apsaras were sporting on the banks of the
Mandakini. On seeing that the rishi had come there, they were frightened and came to their senses. Some of them
immersed themselves in the water. Some others tried to cover themselves with creepers. On seeing that supreme
among sages, some others tried to clutch at their garments. The sage realized that though they were naked, they
had not been ashamed of his son. He understood that though he still had attachment, his son had been freed. He
was both pleased and ashamed.

'"Surrounded by gods and gandharvas and worshipped by large numbers of maharshis, the illustrious Shankara
arrived there, with the Pinaka in his hand. Mahadeva spoke these words of comfort to Krishna Dvaipayana, who
was tormented by grief on account of his son. 'In earlier times, from me, you sought a son whose valour and conduct would be like that of the fire, the earth, the water, the wind and space. Because of your austerities, a son with
such traits was born from you. He was pure and full of the energy of the brahman. This happened because of my
powers. He has attained the supreme objective, one that is extremely difficult for someone who has not conquered
his senses to obtain, even if that person is a god. O brahmana rishi! Why are you grieving? As long as the mountains are established and as long as the oceans exist, your son's undecaying deeds will endure. A shadow that is
like your son will always be with you. O great sage! Through my favours, you will be able to see it in this world.'

O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thereafter, through the favours of the illustrious Rudra himself, the sage was
enveloped by a shadow and he could see it follow him. He was supremely delighted. O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is Shuka's birth and progress. You asked me about it and I recounted it to you in detail. O king! In ancient times, I was told about this by devarshi Narada, and the great yogi, Vyasa, also told me about it on several
occasions. This is an auspicious history, full of purport about the dharma of moksha. A person who bears this in
mind obtains supreme tranquility and goes to the supreme destination."'
