Vaishampayana said, 'With his mind firmly set on the desire of killing Jarasandha, Bhimasena then spoke to
Krishna of the Yadava lineage, "O Krishna! O tiger among the Yadu lineage! Now that I have girded up my loincloth, this evil one shouldn't be spared by me of his life." Having been thus addressed, Krishna, tiger among men,
then replied to Vrikodara, so as to rush him, because he wanted to see Jarasandha dead, "O Bhima! Then quickly
show us the spirit that you have got from the gods and the power you have got from the wind[Bhima was the son of the wind-god.]. Show it on
Jarasandha." At these words, the immensely strong Bhima, the destroyer of enemies, lifted up the powerful
Jarasandha. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! He whirled him around one hundred times. Then throwing
him down on his knee, he broke his back into two. Trampling him down, he roared out aloud. When Jarasandha
was thus pressed down and the Pandava roared, there was such a loud roar that all beings were terrified. All those
from Magadha were benumbed and expectant women aborted, on hearing Bhimasena and Jarasandha's roars. Has
the Himalaya Mountain, or the earth, been torn apart? On hearing Bhimasena's roars, this is what the residents of
Magadha thought. At night, the destroyers of enemies left the king's dead body at the gate of the palace, as if he
was asleep, and left.

'Krishna had Jarasandha's chariot, with pennants, yoked. He asked the two brothers to ascend it and set his relatives[The kings, some of whom must have been Yadavas.] free. Having been freed from their great fear, the kings and lords of the earth presented many gems to
Krishna, worthy of bearing gems. Unhurt, armed with weapons and vanquishing his enemy, he[Krishna.] mounted the divine chariot and left Girivraja with the kings. With the two brothers as warriors[Bhima and Arjuna.] and with Krishna as the charioteer, the chariot was incapable of being conquered by all the kings and seemed to be always killing. With the two
warriors Bhima and Arjuna riding in it and with Krishna as the charioteer, the beautiful chariot was radiant and invincible to all archers. It was on this chariot that Shakra and Vishnu had fought in the battle that Taraka[A demon eventually killed by Kartikeya.] had
caused. It was this chariot that Krishna ascended and left. It glittered like molten gold and was garlanded with nets
of small bells. It thundered like rain-bearing clouds. It was always victorious in battle and it always killed its enemies. It was on this chariot that Shakra had killed ninety-nine demons. Having obtained this chariot, those bulls
among men rejoiced.

'Then, on seeing the mighty-armed Krishna and his two brothers on the chariots, the citizens of Magadha were
amazed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Divine horses, with the speed of the wind, were yoked to the chariot.
When Krishna ascended it, it looked extremely beautiful. On that supreme chariot there was a flagstaff that did not
seem to be attached to it at all. It was divine in origin, beautiful and with radiance that was like that of Indra's
weapons. It could be seen from a distance of one yojana. Krishna thought of Garuda and he immediately arrived,
the instant he had been thought of, like the tall pillar of a temple[Garuda came and sat on the flagstaff.]. Garuda, eater of serpents, then sat on that
supreme chariot on the flagstaff, together with many other blazing beings that had their mouths open and roared
loudly. Incapable of being seen by those beings, his blazing energy was like the midday sun with its one thousand
rays. O king! That beautiful flagstaff never knocked against a tree. It was never injured by weapons. Though it was
visible to gods and men, it was divine in origin. Achyuta, tiger among men, left on that divine chariot with the two
Pandavas, with the sound like that of thunder. King Vasu had obtained it from Vasava and Brihadratha from Vasu.
In due course, it had passed from Brihadratha to the king who was Brihadratha's son. The mighty-armed and immensely illustrious Pundarikaksha came out from Girivraja and stopped on the level ground outside.

'O king! All the citizens, with the brahmanas in the forefront, approached him there to show homage, in accordance with the prescribed rites. The kings who had been liberated from their bondage, worshipped Madhusudana
with words of praise. "O mighty-armed! O son of Devaki! Aided by the strength of Bhima and Arjuna, it is not
surprising that the protection of dharma should be vested in you. Today, you have accomplished the task of rescuing kings who had been miserably immersed in Jarasandha's terrible mire of a lake. O Vishnu! O supreme among
men! We languished in that terrible mountain fortress. It is our destiny that we have been freed and you have obtained blazing fame. O tiger among men! O bull among men! Please tell us what we should do. However difficult
may be the task, know that the kings will accomplish it." Reassuring them, the great-minded Hrishikesha said,
"Yudhishthira wishes to perform the rajasuya. He who lives by dharma wishes to become a sovereign emperor. All
of you must aid him in the sacrifice." O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then all those kings gave their words
with happy hearts. The lords of the earth then made Dasharha[Krishna.] share in their riches. Though disinclined, Govinda
accepted, out of affection towards them.

'The maharatha Sahadeva, Jarasandha's son, came out with his relatives and his advisers, with the priest at the
forefront. Sahadeva bowed down low before Vasudeva, god among men, and bowed down in homage, with
presents of many gems. Krishna provided assurances to the frightened one. Then and there, he instated Jarasandha's son[As the king.]. Having been allied with Krishna and having obtained homage from the two Parthas[Bhima and Arjuna.], the intelligent
king again entered Brihadratha's city. The lotus-eyed Krishna, resplendent with supreme radiance and laden with
many riches, left with the two Parthas.

'Achuyta and the two Pandavas went to Indraprastha. On meeting Dharmaraja, he happily said, "O supreme
among kings! Through good fortune, Bhima has killed the mighty Jarasandha. The kings who were imprisoned
have been set free. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through good fortune, the skilled Bhimasena and
Dhananjaya are well. They have returned unharmed to their own city." Then Yudhishthira worshipped Krishna, as
he deserved. He embraced Bhima and Arjuna in delight. Having eliminated Jarasandha and obtained victory
through his brothers, Ajatashatru enjoyed himself with his brothers. The Pandava[Yudhishthira.] and his brothers then went to
the freed kings[They had also come to Indraprastha.] and in accordance with age, showed them homage and paid their respects. They then gave them
leave to depart. Having been thus instructed by Yudhishthira, the kings swiftly left for their own respective kingdoms on their different mounts, happy in their hearts. Thus did the immensely intelligent Janardana, tiger among
men, get his enemy Jarasandha killed through the Pandavas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having ensured
Jarasandha's killing through his intelligence, that conqueror of enemies[Krishna.] then took leave from Dharmaraja, Pritha
and Krishna[Droupadi.] and from Subhadra, Bhimasena, Phalguna[Arjuna.] and the twins. Having taken leave of Dhoumya, he
prepared to leave for his own city in that chief divine chariot, radiant as the bright morning sun. It had been given
to him by Dharmaraja and it thundered over the directions. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Led by Yudhishthira, the Pandavas circumambulated Krishna, whose deeds never decay. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When
the illustrious Krishna, Devaki's son, departed, the Pandavas obtained great glory. They had won a great victory
and had provided security to the kings. This deed added to that. O king! They themselves found great joy in
Droupadi. The king[Yudhishthira.] was then famous for the protection of his kingdom and in accordance with dharma, did
whatever was consistent with dharma, kama and artha.'
