Janamejaya asked, 'When the great-souled Partha went to Shakra's world for the sake of the weapons, what did
Yudhishthira and the other Pandavas do?'

Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-souled Partha went to Shakra's world for the sake of the weapons, those
bulls among men lived in Kamyaka, together with Krishna[Droupadi.]. One day, the best of the Bharatas, together with
Krishna, were unhappily seated in a deserted spot. They sorrowed over Dhananjaya. There were tears in their
throats and they were miserable. All of them were flooded with grief on account of the separation from Dhananjaya and were miserable because of the loss of the kingdom.

'Then the mighty-armed Bhima spoke to Yudhishthira, "O great king! It was on your instructions that the bull
among men went. The lives of the sons of Pandu are established in Arjuna. If he is destroyed, there is no doubt that
we ourselves, the Panchalas and their sons, Satyaki and Vasudeva will be destroyed. That energetic one departed,
without thinking about the many difficulties he would confront. Bibhatsu went on your instructions. What can
cause greater grief than that? All of us have depended on the arms of that great-souled one, thinking that we will
triumph over our enemies and win the earth. It was the influence of the one with the bow that prevented me from
killing all of Dhritarashtra's sons, together with Soubala, in the midst of that sabha. We have the strength of our
arms and we are controlling the anger for which, you are the reason. We are protected by Vasudeva. If Krishna and
we had killed the enemies led by Karna, we would have ruled the earth, conquered through the strength of our
arms. All of us are faced with this calamity because of your vice of gambling. O king! We do not lack in manliness. We are supremely strong among those who are strong. O great king! You must bear in mind the dharma of
kshatriyas. It is not the dharma of kshatriyas to reside in the forest. The learned have said that the supreme dharma
of kshatriyas is to rule over the kingdom. O king! You know the dharma of kshatriyas. Do not stray from that path
of dharma. O king! Let us kill the sons of Dhritarashtra before the twelve[This should really be thirteen years.] years have passed. Return from the
forest and summon back Partha and Janardana. O great king! O lord of the earth! Let us kill their armies and battle
formations in a great battle. I will send the sons of Dhritarashtra to another world. Together with Soubala, Duryodhana, Karna and whoever else wants to fight back, I will kill all the sons of Dhritarashtra. After I have pacified
them, you can return again to the forest. O lord of the earth! If we do this, no blame will be attached to you. O father[The word used is tata. This means father, but is also used for any elder or superior.]! O destroyer of enemies! If a sin is committed, we can perform various sacrifices. O great king! Wiping it
off in that way, we can attain supreme heaven. O king! This is the way it should be, if our king is not foolish or is
not given to procrastination[Alternatively, childish.]. Indeed, you are always devoted to dharma. But it is certainly the way of the wise to
kill those who are deceitful through deceitful means. There is no sin attached to killing deceitful ones through deceitful means. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Those who are learned in dharma say that in accordance with dharma, a day and a night are equal to an entire year. O illustrious one! O great king! We have heard
the words from the Vedas that in times of calamity, one entire year is equal to a day. O Achyuta[This is being addressed to Yudhishthira. So Achyuta is in the sense of one without decay.]! Therefore, if
the Vedas are the authority, regard the passage of thirteen years as equal to a single day. O destroyer of enemies!
This is the time to kill Duryodhana and his followers. O king! Otherwise, he will bring the entire earth under his
suzerainty." When Bhima said this, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira inhaled the fragrance of the Pandava's head and
spoke to him in tones of pacification, "O mighty-armed one! There is no doubt that you will kill Suyodhana, together with Gandivadhanva, but only after the thirteen years have passed. O Partha! O illustrious one! You have
said that the time has arrived. But I cannot utter a lie, because that finds no place in me. O Kounteya! O invincible
one! You will kill Suyodhana and his followers, but without resorting to deceit, because that will certainly be sin."

While Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was speaking to Bhima, the immensely fortunate and great rishi Brihadashva
arrived.

'He was a follower of dharma. And when Dharmaraja, with dharma in his soul, saw him arrive, he worshipped
him with madhuparka[A mixture based on honey that is offered to guests. It is made of five ingredients-curds, clarified butter, water, wax and candied sugar.], as is prescribed in the sacred texts. When he was rested and seated, the mighty-armed
Yudhishthira looked at him and addressed him in these piteous words, "O illustrious one! I have been robbed of
my riches and my kingdom in gambling with dice. I was challenged by those who were skilled in deceit and skilled
in playing with dice. I am not skilled in dice and the deceitful ones had decided on a course of evil. My wife is
more precious to me than my own life and she was dragged into the sabha. Is there any king on earth who is as
misfortunate as I am? Have you seen anyone else? Have you heard of anyone else? I think that there is no man
who is more miserable than I am." Brihadashva replied, "O great king! O Pandava! You have said you think that
there is no man more unfortunate than you are. O unblemished one! O lord of the earth! On this, I can narrate an
account, if you wish to hear it. This is the story of a king who was more miserable than you." At this, the king[Yudhishthira.]
told the illustrious one that he wished to hear the account. He wished to hear about the king who found himself in a
situation like his own.

'Brihadashva said, "O king! O lord of the earth! O Achyuta! Then listen with your brothers. There was a king of
the nishadhas by the name of Virasena. He had a son named Nala, learned in the ways of dharma and artha. We
have heard that this king was deceitfully defeated by Pushkara and though he did not deserve it, lived unhappily in
the forest with his wife. When that king lived in the forest, he never had any horses, any chariots, any brothers or
any kin. But you are surrounded by your brave brothers, who are the equals of the gods and by the foremost among
brahmanas, who are like Brahma himself. Therefore, do not sorrow."

'Yudhishthira said, "O best among eloquent ones! I wish to hear in detail the account of that great-souled Nala.
Please tell it to me."'
