Vaishampayana said, 'At that time, all the relatives assembled there and on seeing Kichaka killed, surrounded him
from all sides and began to weep. All their body hair stood up and they were terrified when they saw Kichaka. All
his limbs were mangled, like a turtle that has been dragged to the land. He had been crushed by Bhimasena, like a
danava by Indra. They sought to take him outside, wishing to perform his funeral rites. Then the assembled sons of
the suta saw Krishna. The unblemished one was stationed nearby, leaning against a pillar. Among the assembled
sutas, an Upakichaka[By extrapolation, Kichaka's relatives (brothers) are also being referred to as Kichakas. Upa means minor. Upakichaka means a minor or inferior Kichaka.] said, "Let us swiftly kill this unchaste one, because of whom Kichaka has been slain. Or let
us not kill her. Let us burn her with her beloved. Though he is dead, let us do what would have brought the son of
suta pleasure." Then they told Virata, "Kichaka has been killed because of her. We will burn her with him. You
should give us permission." O lord of the earth! Knowing the valour of the sutas, the king gave permission that
Sairandhri should be burnt with the son of the suta. They approached the terrified and lotus-eyed Krishna. She was
stupefied and the Kichakas forcibly grabbed her. All of them raised and tied the slender-waisted one and carried
her in the direction of the cremation ground. O king! The unblemished one was thus borne away by the sons of the
suta. Krishna wailed for her protectors, because she did have protectors.

'Droupadi said, "Jaya! Jayanta! Vijaya! Jayatsena! Jayadbala[The secret names the Pandavas had adopted.]! Hear my words. The sons of the suta are carrying me away. The twangs of their bows and the slapping of their arms is heard in great battles. The roars of their
chariots are terrible. They are swift. They are the powerful and illustrious gandharvas. Hear my words. The sons of
the suta are carrying me away."'

Vaishampayana said, 'As soon as he heard the wail of Krishna's piteous words, Bhima unhesitatingly leapt up
from his bed. Bhimasena said, "O Sairandhri! I have heard the words that you have spoken. O timid one! You have
no reason to fear the sons of the suta." Having spoken these words, the mighty-armed one stretched and extended
his body and changed his attire, in a great rage. He emerged, but not through a door[In his hurry, he did not look for a door, but broke down a wall and came out.]. Bhimasena scaled the ramparts and swiftly uprooted a tree. He dashed towards the cremation ground, following the Kichakas. That tree was
ten vyamas long[Vyama is a measure of distance, the distance between the tips of the fingers from one hand to another, when both
hands are extended outwards.] and he brandished it, with its trunk and its branches. The strong one rushed towards the sutas,
like the god of death with a staff in his hand. The impact of his thighs made nyagrodha, ashvattha and kimshuka
trees fall down on the ground and these were piled in a heap. On seeing the gandharva arrive[Because Bhima had stretched and extended his body, he could no longer be recognized.], like an extremely
enraged lion, all the sutas were terrified and trembled in sorrow and dread. The Upakichakas were about to burn
their elder brother and saw the gandharva advance like death. Trembling in sorrow and dread, they told each other,
"A powerful and angry gandharva is advancing, brandishing a tree. Swiftly release Sairandhri. She is the reason
for this great danger." On seeing the tree that had been uprooted by Bhimasena, they released Droupadi and fled
towards the city.

'When Bhima saw them running away, like the wielder of the vajra seeing the danavas[Indra is the wielder of the vajra.], he dispatched one hundred and five of them to Yama's abode. O lord of the earth! He then released Krishna and comforted her. The
mighty-armed one, the invincible Vrikodara, told Panchali Droupadi, whose face was despondent and whose eyes
were full of tears, "O timid one! Those who molested you, though you are blameless, have been killed. O Krishna!
Return to the city. You have nothing to fear. I will go to Virata's kitchen through a different route." O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Thus one hundred and five were slain there, like a giant forest that has been razed down,
with its trees scattered. O king! One hundred and five Kichakas were killed. Including the general earlier, there
were one hundred and six sutas. Men and women gathered to see that great and extraordinary deed. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! They were extremely astounded and had nothing to say.'
