'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that the performer of terrible deeds had arrived to fight, all the Kurus were filled with
delight. Your sons, with Duryodhana at the forefront, were like those who did not have rafts and desired to cross
the ocean, but had now obtained rafts. The kings thought that they had been born again. They welcomed and worshipped Alayudha, Indra among the rakshasas. While the battle between humans raged on, there was a fearful battle between Karna and the rakshasa[Ghatotkacha.]. It was terrible to watch. The Panchalas and the kings smiled as they
watched it. O king! In that fashion, those on your side wandered around here and there. On witnessing the feats of
Hidimba's son in the field of battle, they were frightened. Drona, Drona's son, Kripa and the others uttered wails of
lamentation. All of them were routed and everyone there became senseless. O great king! Your soldiers gave up all
hope of Karna remaining alive. On seeing that Karna was confronting the ultimate calamity, Duryodhana summoned Alayudha, Indra among the rakshasas, and spoke these words to him. 'Vaikartana Karna is engaged with
Hidimba's son. He is performing great deeds in the battle, deserving of someone like him. But behold. Those brave
kings are being killed by Bhimasena's son. They are being struck by many weapons and are like trees struck by a
tusker. In the midst of the kings, let this be your share in the battle[The killing of Ghatotkacha.]. O brave one! You have my permission to
exhibit your valour and destroy him. O destroyer of enemies! Earlier, this wicked Ghatotkacha used his powers of
maya and afflicted Vaikartana Karna.' Having been thus addressed by the king, the rakshasa, whose valour was
fierce, agreed and attacked the mighty-armed Ghatotkacha.

'"O lord! Bhimasena's son abandoned Karna. As his enemy[Alayudha.] advanced, he crushed him with arrows. There
was a battle between those two enraged Indras among the rakshasas. They were like two crazy elephants fighting
in the forest, desiring the same she-elephant. Having been freed from the rakshasa, Karna, supreme among rathas,
attacked Bhimasena on a chariot that was as radiant as the sun. On seeing that Ghatotkacha was being consumed in
the battle with Alayudha, like the leader of a herd of cattle when engaged with a lion, Bhima, supreme among
strikers, disregarded the advancing one[Karna.].

'"O lord! On seeing that he was advancing, Alayudha abandoned Ghatotkacha and challenged Bhimasena. O
lord! Bhima, the destroyer of rakshasas, advanced impetuously and countered the Indra among rakshasas and his
followers with a shower of arrows. O king! Alayudha, the scorcher of enemies, repeatedly showered down swift
arrows that had been sharpened on stone on Kounteya. All the other rakshasas also attacked Bhimasena. Wishing
to ensure the victory of your sons, they wielded many terrible weapons. The immensely strong Bhimasena was afflicted by those strong ones. He pierced each of them with five sharp arrows. Those rakshasas, born from the
wombs of asses, were slaughtered by Bhima. They wailed loudly in lamentation and fled in the ten directions. On
seeing that his followers had been terrorized by Bhima, the immensely strong rakshasa attacked with great force
and covered him with arrows. In that encounter, Bhimsena used sharp arrows that were pointed at the tip against
the rakshasa. Alayudha severed some of the arrows that were shot by Bhima in the battle. In the encounter, he
quickly received some of the others[Presumably, he seized them by the hand.]. On seeing this, Bhima, whose valour was terrible, powerfully hurled a
club at the Indra among the rakshasas. Its descent was like that of the thunder. The club descended powerfully, like
a flaming fire. Having struck the club down with a club, he[Alayudha.] advanced towards Bhima. Kounteya countered the
Indra among rakshasas with a shower of arrows. Using his own sharp arrows, the rakshasa rendered all of them unsuccessful. Instructed by the Indra among the rakshasas, all the rakshasa soldiers, terrible in form, returned and began to kill the rathas and the elephants. Severely afflicted by the rakshasas, the Panchalas, the Srinjayas, the horses
and the supreme elephants could not find any peace there.

'"On seeing that this extremely terrible encounter was going on in the great battle, the best of men[Krishna.] spoke
these words to Dhananjaya. 'Behold. The mighty-armed Bhima has come under the grasp of the Indra among the
rakshasas. O Pandava! Do not reflect. Follow in his footsteps. The maharathas Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja and Droupadi's sons will go and fight with Karna. O Pandava! On your instructions, let
Nakula, Sahadeva and the valiant Yuyudhana kill all the other rakshasas. O mighty-armed one! As for you, counter
this army of Drona's that is in front of us. O tiger among men! Counter the grave danger that has arisen before us
now.' Having been addressed by Krishna, those maharathas followed the instructions and advanced against Vaikartana Karna and the other rakshasas in the battle.

'"The powerful Indra among the rakshasas drew his bow all the way back and released arrows that were like
venomous serpents, using these to sever Bhima's bow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While Bhimasena
looked on, in that encounter, the immensely strong one used sharp arrows to kill his horses and charioteer. With his
horses slain and with his charioteer killed, he descended from his chariot. He roared and hurled a terrible and
heavy club towards him[Towards Alayudha.]. The mighty club descended with a terrible noise. However, the rakshasa roared and
destroyed it with his own terrible club. On seeing that terrible and fearful deed performed by the Indra among the
rakshasas, Bhimasena was delighted. He quickly seized another supreme club. There was a tumultuous battle between the man and the rakshasa. As the clubs descended, the earth trembled severely with that force. They cast
aside their clubs and again clashed against each other. They struck each other with their fists, with a sound like that
of the thunder. Extremely intolerant, they struck each other with the wheels of chariots, yokes, axles, bumpers and
seats. They clashed against each other and blood flowed from their wounds. They repeatedly attacked each other,
like crazy and giant elephants. Hrishikesha was engaged in the welfare of the Pandavas. On seeing this, he instructed Hidimba's son to protect Bhimasena."'
