Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! There was a terrible battle of words between them. Miserable, King Dhritarashtra spoke these words. "Shame on a man-since he is reduced to such a state. O lord! My son was the
master of eleven armies[The eleven akshouhinis.]. All the kings followed his commands and he enjoyed the earth. With a club and on
foot, he now has to advance forcefully in an encounter. Having been the protector of the earth, my son is now without a protector. Since he has to advance with a club, what can this be, other than destiny? O Sanjaya! My son must
have suffered from great misery." Having said this, the grieving king stopped.

'Sanjaya replied, "The valiant one[Duryodhana.] was cheerful. He roared like a cloud and bellowed like a bull. The warrior
challenged Partha in that battle. When the great-souled king of the Kurus challenged Bhima, many extremely terrible portents of different types manifested themselves. Fierce winds began to blow and showers of dust fell down.
All the directions were enveloped in darkness. Tumultuous thunder descended with a loud roar and the body hair
stood up. Hundreds of meteors fell down, roaring in the sky. O lord of the earth! Though it was not the right time,
Rahu devoured the sun[Rahu is the demon who devours the sun and causes a solar eclipse.]. The earth, with all its forests and trees, trembled, as if in a giant quake. Harsh winds began to blow, showering stones and dragging them along the ground. The summits of mountains fell down on the
ground. Many kinds of animals were seen to run away in the ten directions. Extremely terrible jackals howled in
fierce tones, their mouths blazing. Extremely fearful and strong sounds were heard and it made the body hair stand
up. O Indra among kings! The directions blazed and animals uttered inauspicious noises. In every direction, the
water in wells increased. O king! At that time, invisible and loud sounds were heard.

' "On seeing these evil portents, Vrikodara spoke to his elder brother, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. 'The evil-souled
Suyodhana is incapable of defeating me in this battle. Today, I will free myself of the anger that has been lodged
deep in my heart for a long time. Suyodhana, Indra among Kouravas, will be like Khandava before the fire god. O
Pandava! Today, I will uproot the stake that has been lodged in your heart. I will slay the wicked one, the worst of
the Kuru lineage, with the club. Today, I will free you and place a garland of fame around you. In the field of battle, I will kill the performer of evil deeds with my club. With the club, I will shatter his body into a hundred fragments. He will not enter the city of Varanasahvya[Hastinapura.] again. He released snakes while I was sleeping and mixed poison in my food in Pramanakoti. He tried to burn us down in the house of lac. He robbed us of everything and disrespected us in the assembly hall. O unblemished one! He exiled us in the forest, with one year of concealment. O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! I will bring an end to all those hardships today. I will kill him and, in a single
day, free ourselves of those debts. O best among the Bharata lineage! Today, this evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra,
whose soul is not clean, will come to an end. He will not see his mother and father again. This Kuru king is the
worst of Shantanu's lineage. He will abandon his life and his kingdom today and lie down on the ground. King
Dhritarashtra will hear that his son has been slain by me and remember the wicked deeds that were performed because of Shakuni's advice.' O tiger among kings! Having said this, the valiant one grasped his club. He stationed
himself in the battle, like Shakra challenging Vritra.

' "Duryodhana also raised his club, like Kailasa with its summit. On seeing this, Bhimasena again angrily spoke
to Duryodhana. 'Remember the extremely wicked deeds and conduct that you and King Dhritarashtra exhibited
towards us in Varanavata[The attempt to burn the Pandavas down in the house of lac.]. Droupadi was in her season and was oppressed in the assembly hall. In the gambling
match, the king was deceived by you and Soubala. Because of your deeds, we confronted a great hardship in the
forest and also in the city of Virata, as if we had entered into another womb[This was the year of concealment in Virata's kindom. Since the Pandavas and Droupadi were in disguise, they were pretending to be other
people. In that sense, it was as if they had been reborn as other people.]. I will pay back all that today. O
evil-minded one! It is through good fortune that I have met you. It is because of your deeds that powerful
Gangeya, best among rathas, was brought by Yajnasena's son[Yajnasena is Drupada and the son in question is Shikhandi.] and brought down, is lying down on a bed of arrows. Drona, Karna and the powerful Shalya have been slain. Shakuni Soubala, the source of this fire of enmity,
has been killed. The wicked Pratikami, who seized Droupadi by the hair, and all your brave brothers, valiant warriors, have been slain[As we have mentioned earlier, there is no mention of the Pratikami seizing Droupadi by the hair, or of the Pratikami being killed.]. There are many other kings who have been killed because of your deeds. There is no
doubt that I will kill you with this club today.' O Indra among kings! Having been thus addressed by Vrikodara,
your son was not frightened. O king! Truth was his valour and he replied, 'O Vrikodara! Why speak a lot? Fight. O
worst of your lineage! Today, I will kill you and destroy your love for fighting. Know that Duryodhana is not inferior and is not like an ordinary man. He is incapable of being frightened by someone like you. For a long time, I
have harboured a desire in my heart that I will engage in a duel with clubs with you. Through good fortune and the
favours of the thirty gods, the opportunity has presented itself. O evil-minded one! What is the point of speaking a
lot? Do what you have promised in your words. Do not delay.' On hearing these words, everyone applauded him,
the kings, the Somakas and all the others who were assembled there. Having been thus honoured by all of them,
his body hair stood up in joy. The steadfast descendant of the Kuru lineage made up his mind to fight. As if they
were cheering a crazy elephant, the kings slapped their palms and delighted the intolerant Duryodhana. The great-
souled Pandava raised his club and rushed at the great-souled one. Vrikodara forcefully attacked Dhritarashtra's
son. The elephants present there trumpeted and the horses neighed. The Pandavas desired victory and their
weapons blazed." '
