Yudhishthira said,  "I  wish  to  hear  the  truth  about  the  supreme  ordinances  that  govern  gifts  of  cattle.  It  is
through those that one obtains all the eternal worlds."

'Bhishma replied, "O lord of the earth! There is nothing that is superior to donating cows. If a lawfully obtained
cow is gifted, the lineage is immediately saved. These[The ordinances.] were properly developed for the virtuous, but became appropriately applied to all subjects. They have been followed from ancient times. O king! Hear about the ordinances
for gifting cows. In ancient times, cows were brought before Mandhata and he had doubts about what should be
done when the cows were donated. He asked Brihaspati, who replied. 'On the previous day, the donor should worship brahmanas and determine the appropriate time for making the gift, following the rituals. The cow should be of
the Rohini type[Rohini originally meant a red cow, though later, it came to be applied to all good cows.]. The cows to be given should be addressed as samanga and bahula[Samanga means one with all the limbs intact. Bahula means large, but the word also means a cow.]. Entering amidst the cows,
the following words from the sacred texts should be recited. "The cow is my mother. The bull is my father. Let
them give me heaven and prosperity and status on earth. I seek refuge in the cow." One should spend the night
amidst the cows. Those words spoken by the sages must also be uttered when the cow is given away. The donor
must spend the night with the cows, like a friend and following the vows they practise[Like lying down on the ground.]. By reducing himself to
their state, he instantly becomes cleansed of sins. When the sun rises, he must give away the cow, with a bull and a
calf. When these three are given away, you will obtain benedictions and the objective of prosperity. "They[Cows.] are the
source of energy[Though not explicitly indicated, these are words the donor is speaking.]. They are the energy of intelligence. They are the source of the immortality in sacrifices. The
universe is established on them. They are the source of eternal prosperity on earth. They are spoken of as the
source of all offspring. Let the cows drive all evil away. They have traits of Surya and Soma. Let them convey me
to heaven. Like a mother, let them offer me refuge. Let them yield all the benedictions, even those that haven't
been uttered. When I have completed this act of donation, let my body be freed. Like Sarasvati, let them envelope
me with benefits. You are always the conveyors of auspicious deeds. I have sought refuge with you. Determine a
desirable end for me. It is because of you that I am what I am today. By giving you away, I am giving myself away.
From my mind, I have let you go. Through my mind, I have sought refuge in you. You are the one who ignites the
peaceful form of Soma and the fierce form of Surya." In this way, following the ordinances, the donor of the cow
must utter the first part of the verse that has been indicated. When he has spoken, the brahmana who knows about
the rituals concerning the donation of cows must receive and utter the second part of the verse[Probably the two sentences that begin with, 'Through my mind ...'].

'"'Instead of a cow, if a donor gives away an equivalent amount of garments and riches, he is regarded as the
donor of a cow. The giver of garments and gold will ensure subsistence through these[This shloka is unclear and we have taken liberties.]. The names and number of
what is being given must be enumerated. The fruits are entry for thirty-six thousand, eight thousand and twenty
thousand respectively[Yet another cryptic shloka. Entry is presumably in heaven and years is implicit. One can deduce that thirty-six
thousand years is for cattle, eight thousand for garments and twenty thousand for gold.]. These are the ancient qualities, progressively described, of donating cows and other objects. These are equal to donating a cow only when the eighth step has been completed[A cryptic shloka again. The donor of equivalent objects obtains the benefits only when the recipient has taken
eight steps homewards.]. A person who gives a
cow enjoys good conduct. A person who donates the equivalent enjoys freedom from fear. Whether a cow or riches are given, the donor does not suffer from misery. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who know about
what has been recounted ascend upwards to the worlds of Vishnu and the moon. Having given a cow away, the
donor must practise the vow of cattle for three nights. For one night, he should dwell alone, with cattle. For three
nights after kamyashtami, he should only subsist on cow's milk, cowdung and cow's urine. The donor of a bull obtains merits obtained by one who follows the vows of the Vedas. The donor of a couple of cows becomes knowledgable in the Vedas. If a person follows the rituals in giving away cows, he enjoys the best of worlds. However,
this is not enjoyed by someone who doesn't know about the rituals. If a person gives away a single cow, he obtains
all the objects of desire on earth. That cow is like one which satisfies all desires with its milk. If one properly observes havya and kavya 91 and gives away bulls, the benefits obtained are superior. The ritual must not be divulged
to a person who is not a disciple, one who does not follow vows, one who lacks faith, or one who is crooked in intelligence. In all the worlds, this is indeed a secret dharma. This dharma must not be indiscriminately spoken about
here and there. There may be men in this world who are virtuous and faithful. However, there are also inferior
men, who are like rakshasas. If this is divulged to them, it will lead to injury. There will be evil ends if non-believers get to hear about this.

'"'There are kings who have listened to Brihaspati's instructions and have donated cows. They have been auspicious in conduct and have followed excellent vows. They have obtained the worlds. O king! I will recount their
names. Listen  to  me-Ushinara,  Vishvagashva,  Nriga,  Bhagiratha,  Yuvanashva's  famous  son  Mandhata,  King
Muchukunda, Bhuridyumna, Naishadha, Somaka, Pururava, Emperor Bharata, from whom all those of the Bharata
lineage have descended, Rama, the brave son of Dasharatha, others who are famous for their deeds, and King Dili-
pa, whose deeds were extensive. They knew about the rituals, donated cows and went to heaven. King Mandhata
was engaged in sacrifices, donations, austerities, royal dharma and donation of cows. O Partha! That is the reason I
have spoken to you about Brihaspati's words. Bear them in mind. Cheerfully, give cows to the best of brahmanas.
Having obtained the kingdom of the Kurus, you will then perform auspicious deeds.'"'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Dharmaraja did everything that Bhishma had spoken to him about, following the
ordinances about the donation of cows. The king properly upheld the dharma that the god of the gods[This means Brihaspati.] had instructed Mandhata about. O king! He always gave cows and subsisted on barley and cowdung, drinking the urine
of cows. He controlled his soul, slept on the ground and sported a tuft of hair on his head. He was like a bull and
became a bull among kings. Controlled in his soul, the king always praised cows and tended to the calves. The
king no longer used cows as beasts of burden. Wherever he had to go, he used excellent horses instead.'
