'Yudhishthira said, "O infinitely valorous one! It is wonderful that you should be meditating thus. O refuge of the
worlds! I hope the three worlds will be safe. O Purushottama! You have resorted to the fourth stage of
meditation[There are three normal states-being awake, sleeping (with dreams) and deep sleep (without dreams
and without distractions). There is a fourth stage beyond this, known as turiya. This transcends consciousness and one experiences union with the brahman.]. O god! You have withdrawn and my mind is surprised. You have stilled the five winds that perform
action in the body[This is a reference to the five winds (vayu) of pranayama-udana, prana, samana, apana and vyana.]. You have established all the senses in your mind. You have restrained your senses and your
mind in your intelligence[We have used intelligence for buddhi.]. O god! All those groups have been immersed in your soul[The atman, the text using the word kshetrajna.]. Your body hair is still
and so are your intelligence and your mind. O Madhava! You don't seem to be here and are like a pillar, a wall or a
rock. O Achyuta! You are as still as the blazing flame of a lamp where there is no wind. O illustrious one! O god!
Firm in your resolution, you are as immobile as that. O god! If I deserve to hear it and if it is not a secret, show me
your favours and dispel my doubts. You are the creator and the transformer[In the sense of destroyer.]. You are the one who decays and
you are the own who does not decay. You are without a beginning and without an end. O Purushottoma! You are
the one who is here now. I am bowing down my head before you. With devotion, I am seeking refuge with you. O
supreme among upholders of dharma! Tell me the truth about this meditation."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The illustrious one, Vasava's younger brother, then brought his mind, his intelligence and
his senses to their usual state. Smiling first, he said, "Bhishma is lying down on a bed of arrows, like a fire that has
been pacified. The tiger among men was thinking of me and my mind was concentrated on him. The sound of his
bowstring against his palm was like thunder with lightning. Even the king of the gods could not tolerate that. My
mind had gone out to him. In earlier times, when he swiftly attacked the assembled circle of kings and abducted
the three maidens[Amba, Ambika and Ambalika. Described in Section 60 (Volume 5).], my mind had gone out to him. When he fought for twenty-three nights with Bhargava
Rama[Parashurama.] without being overpowered, my mind had gone out to him. In the proper way, Ganga had carried the king
in her womb. O father[The word used is tata.]! He was Vasishtha's student. O king! My mind had gone out to him. The extremely energetic and intelligent one wielded divine weapons and knew the four Vedas and the Vedangas. My mind had gone
out to him. O Pandava! He was the beloved disciple of Rama[Parashurama.], Jamadagni's son. He was the store of all kinds of
knowledge. My mind had gone out to him. He united his senses, controlled his mind and his intelligence and
sought refuge with me. My mind had gone out to him. O bull among men! He knew the past, the present and the
future and upheld the best forms of dharma. My mind had gone out to him. O Partha! When that tiger among men
has ascended to heaven because of his own deeds, the earth will be like a night when there is no moon. O Yudhishthira! Gangeya Bhishma is terrible in his valour. Go to him and carefully ask him about what is in your mind.
O lord of the earth! Ask him about the four Vedas, the four rites of sacrifice[One associated with each of the Vedas.], the four stages of life and the dharma of the four varnas. Bhishma, has borne the great burden of the Kouravas, and with him, all that knowledge is
about to set. That is the reason I am asking you to approach him." When he heard Vasudeva's excellent words,
which were full of purport, the one who knew about dharma[Yudhishthira.] addressed Janardana in a voice that was choking
with tears. "O Madhava! O one who shows honours! There is not the slightest bit of doubt in my mind about the
truth of what you have said about Bhishma's powers. I have heard the great-souled brahmanas talk about the immensely fortunate and great-souled Bhishma's powers. O destroyer of enemies! You are the lord of the worlds and
there cannot be any doubt about what you have said. O Madhava! If your mind is so inclined towards showing me
your favours, then, with you at the forefront, let us go and see Bhishma. When the illustrious sun god has turned
around[Towards uttarayana.], he will leave for those worlds. O mighty-armed one! Therefore, Kourava should also see you. You are
the origin of the gods. You are the one who is destroyed and you are also the one who is not destroyed. You are the
storehouse of the brahman. Therfore, seeing you is a true gain." On hearing Dharmaraja's words, Madhusudana
instructed Satyaki, who was next to him, that his chariot should be yoked.

'Satyaki departed from Krishna's presence and went and told Daruka that Krishna's chariot should be yoked.
The different parts of that supreme chariot were decorated with gold. Its parts were adorned with sapphires and
crystals. The wheels were encrusted with gold. It was swift and possessed the complexion of the sun's rays. It was
decorated with many kinds of gems and jewels. It blazed like the rising sun. The wonderful standard had
Tarkshya[Garuda.] atop it. It was as swift as thought and its different parts were embellished with gold. Sugriva, Sainya
and the best of horses were yoked to it. On hearing Satyaki's instructions, Daruka quickly yoked it properly. O lion
among kings! Hands joined in salutation, he then went and informed that it had been readied.'
