'Bhishma said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. There was a radiant king from Anga and he
was famous by the name of Vasuhoma. The king was always engaged in virtuous acts of dharma and great austerities, together with his wife. He went to Munjaprishtha, revered by large numbers of devarshis. The peak of Meru
was in the golden mountains of the Himalayas. At Munjavata, Rama had instructed that the matted locks should be
seized[The Rama in question is Parashurama. There was another Munjavata near Kurukshetra ( Section-33...............
Volume 2), but this Munjavata is being equated with Munjaprishtha. It is not at all clear whose matted locks
were being seized, and for what purpose. Munja is a kind of grass and Munjaprishtha means a slope where this
grass is found.]. Since then, the rishis, rigid in their vows, have referred to the region as Munjaprishtha and it is frequented by Rudra. He dwelt there, always with much learning and qualities, and was respected by the brahmanas.
He became like a devarshi.

'"King Mandhata was an afflicter of enemies and Shakra's esteemed friend. In a cheerful frame of mind, he once
arrived there. As Mandhata approached King Vasuhoma, he saw that having performed excellent austerities, the
latter stood humbly before him. Vasuhoma gave the king a cow and arghya and asked him if everything was well
in his eight-limbed kingdom. Vasuhoma asked the king, who followed the codes of good conduct that had been
laid down from ancient times, 'What can I do for you?' O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Mandhata, supreme
among kings, was greatly delighted. Having taken a seat, he spoke to the immensely wise Vasuhoma. 'O king! You
have studied all of Brihaspati's doctrines. O lord of men! The sacred texts of Ushanas are also known to you. I
wish to hear from you about how the rod of chastisement was created. How did it first arise? Why is it said to be
supreme? How did the rod come to be firmly established amidst kshatriyas? O immensely wise one! Tell me and I
will give you the fees that should be given to a preceptor.'

'"Vasuhoma replied, 'O king! Listen to how the rod was created for the protection of the world and for maintaining and protecting subjects. It is the eternal essence of dharma. We have heard that the illustrious Brahma, the
grandfather of all the worlds, wished to perform a sacrifice and could not find an officiating priest who was his
equal. The god then conceived a foetus and carried it within his head for many long years. After it had been borne
for a full one thousand years, when he sneezed, the foetus fell out. O scorcher of enemies! Thus the Prajapati
named Kshupa was created. O king! That great-souled one became the officiating priest at the sacrifice. O bull
among kings! Thus Brahma's sacrifice started. However, because of the cheerful form he had to adopt, the rod disappeared[As a person who was sacrificing, Brahma had to assume a tranquil form, but the rod was fierce.]. When it vanished, the subjects were mixed up. There was no difference between what should be
done and what should not be done and between what should be eaten and what should not be eaten. There was no
difference between what should be drunk and what should not be drunk. How could there be success? They injured
each other. There was no distinction between whom one should go to and whom one should not go to[A reference to sexual intercourse.]. One's
own property and that of others became the same. They snatched from each other, like dogs after meat. The weak
were killed by the strong and no one exhibited any respect. At this, the grandfather worshipped the illustrious and
eternal Vishnu, the god who grants boons, and spoke to the great god. "You must certainly show compassion towards these virtuous ones. Arrange it so that there is no mixing up here." At this, the illustrious one meditated for a
long time, holding a trident and wearing matted hair. From his own self, that supreme among gods created the rod.
And from that was created the policy for observing dharma, the goddess Sarasvati. She was created and is famous
in the three worlds as dandaniti. The illustrious one again meditated for a long time, with the trident, supreme
among weapons. He made one person a lord over his respective dominion. The god with the thousand eyes became
the lord of the gods. Vaivasvata Yama was made the lord of the ancestors. Kubera became the lord of riches and
the rakshasas. Meru became the lord of mountains and the great ocean that of rivers. He decreed that Varuna
should be the lord over the divine kingdom of the waters[The Critical edition probably has a typo here. It says suras, which can only be translated as divine waters. It
should probably read asuras, in which case, Varuna would also be lord over the underwater demons.]. Death became the lord of living beings and the fire of
energy. The lord announced that Ishana[Shiva.] would be the protector of the Rudras. Vasishtha became the lord of
brahmanas, the fire[In the form of Jataveda.] of the Vasus, the sun of energy[Energy is mentioned twice.], the moon of nakshatras and Amshuman[Amshuman means one with the rays and can refer to either the sun or the moon. Here, it means the moon.] of herbs.
The supreme lord instructed that Skanda Kumara, the one with twelve arms, would be the king of the spirits[Bhutas.].
Time became the one who pacifies, destroys and humbles everything and the lord of the four divisions of death[Resulting from disease, weapons, one's own acts and Yama.]
and happiness and unhappiness. The lord of riches, the king of the yakshas, became the lord of all beings. It has
been heard that the one with the trident in his hand[Shiva.] became the lord of all the Rudras. There was that single son
named Kshupa, who had been born from Brahma's mental powers. He was given the supreme lordship over all
subjects and made the upholder of all kinds of dharma. When the sacrifice started, according to the proper rites,
Mahadeva[Shiva.] honoured Vishnu and gave the rod, the protector of dharma, to him. Vishnu gave it to Angiras. Angiras, supreme among sages, gave it to Indra and Marichi. Marichi gave it to Bhrigu. Bhrigu gave that rod, full of
dharma, to the rishis. The rishis gave it to the guardians of the worlds and the guardians of the worlds gave it to
Kshupa. Ksupa gave it to Manu, the son of the sun god. For the sake of preserving the subtleties of dharma and
artha and to protect his own self, Manu, the son of the sun and the god of funeral ceremonies, gave it to his sons. It
should be one's duty to apply the rod differentially, according to dharma, and not wilfully, using harsh words of
censure, imprisonment, extracting bonds, fines of gold and expulsion. However, physical dismemberment and execution should not be used for trifling reasons, nor should physical punishment, corporal punishment and exile.
Right from the beginning, the rod has been awake and has protected subjects. The illustrious Indra remains awake
and after him it is Agni, the fire god[If this remaining awake is interpreted as wielding the rod, this is an alternative line of succession.]. After Agni has remained awake, it is Varuna. After Varuna, it is Prajapati.
After Prajapati, Dharma, who humbles souls, remains awake. After Dharma, it is eternal Vyavasaya[While this word has many meanings, Resolution is best here.], Brahma's
son. After Vyavasaya, Tejas[Energy.] remains awake, for the cause of protection. The medicinal plants and herbs come
after Tejas and the mountains after the plants and herbs. After the mountains, the juices and the qualities of the
juices remain awake. After that, the goddess Nirriti[The goddess of calamity and destruction.] remains awake and after Nirriti, it is the stellar bodies. The
Vedas are established in the stellar bodies. After that, it is the lord Hayashira[Literally, with the head of a horse, one of Vishnu's forms.]. After him, the undecaying Brahma, the grandfather, remains awake. After the grandfather, the illustrious Mahadeva Shiva remains awake. The
Vishvadevas come after Shiva and the rishis after the Vishvadevas. The illustrious Soma[The moon god.] comes after the rishis
and the eternal gods after Soma. In this world, the brahmanas remain awake and take it up after the gods. After the
brahmanas, kings follow dharma and protect the worlds. After the kshatriyas, it is the eternal mobile and immobile
objects. The subjects remain awake in this world and the rod remains awake among them. The rod is the one who
destroys everything and is a lord who is the grandfather's equal. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At the beginning, in the middle and at the end, time remains awake. Mahadeva Prajapati is the lord of all the worlds. The
lord Shiva Sharva is the god of the gods and always remains awake. He is Kapardi, Shankara, Rudra, Bhava,
Sthanu and Umapati. Thus, the beginning, the middle and the end of the rod have been recounted. A lord of the
earth who knows about dharma must follow the proper conduct and policy.'"

'Bhishma said, "The man who listens to these views of Vasuhoma and having heard, acts properly in accordance
with it, is a king who obtains all his desires. O bull among men! You have been told everything about the rod. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! It controls all the people who transgress dharma."'
