'Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O scorcher of enemies! How should
a learned and mild man behave, when he is abused in an assembly by someone who is stupid,
voluble and harsh?"

'Bhishma replied, "O protector of the earth! Listen to what has been sung about this objective.
An intelligent person must always tolerate a stupid man with limited intelligence. If he is not angered, he obtains the good deeds of the person who is wrathful[The one who is abusing him.]. If he is not angered, he passes
on his own evil deeds to the intolerant and wrathful one. That other one is afflicted and is quaking like a tittibha[A waterhen.]. He should be ignored. He will be hated by people and will be unsuccessful.
A person who is wicked in his deeds will always boast and say, 'In an assembly of people, I have
said this about a revered person. He is ashamed and withered. He is standing there, as if he is
dead.' A shameless person will thus boast about a task that should not be boasted about. A person who is controlled should ignore such a person, who is worst among men. If someone with
limited intelligence says something, it must always be tolerated. Whether that inferior person is
praising or censuring, what can he possibly do? He will be as unsuccessful as a foolish crow
cawing in the forest. If evil-acting people could achieve something through the use of eloquent
words, there would be some purpose in those words. However, those who seek to injure achieve
nothing. Those who are engaged in such conduct only establish that they are born from perverse
ejaculation[A reflection on parentage, bastard. In general, a shameless person.]. He is like a peacock, exhibiting its genitals while it is dancing. One should never
converse with a person who acts in this way. He is impure and finds good conduct difficult. One
should not speak to him. A man who speaks of a person's good qualities in his presence and criticizes him behind his back is like a dog in this world and loses all the worlds hereafter. Whatever
he gives to one hundred people and whatever oblations he offers are destroyed in an instant, if he
criticizes someone behind his back. Therefore, a wise person avoids such an evil-minded one,
like a virtuous person avoids the flesh of a dog. When an evil-souled person abuses a good-
souled person, he exhibits all his own faults, like a snake extending its hood. If a person is engaged in his own tasks and a second person acts against him in those tasks, that second person's
intelligence is like that of an ass that has got submerged in a pile of ashes and dust. You must
stay away from men who are like angry wolves, always engaged in abusing people, or those who
are like crazy and trumpeting elephants, or those who are like extremely fierce dogs. Such a man
treads along the path of the fickle, lacking in control and humility and full of wickedness. Behaving like an enemy, he always wishes to injure you. Shame on such an evil-minded man! If such a
person answers you back, do not assume a pained expression. Be at peace. Those who are firm in
their intelligence do not approve of the superior consorting with the inferior. If he is enraged, he
may slap you with his palm[Literally, the text says five fingers.]. Or he may fling dust and chaff at you. He may frighten you by
baring his teeth. It has been proven that stupid people are violent when they are enraged. Avoid
extremely evil-souled and wicked men and tolerate them in assemblies. If a person always reads
this illustration, he never suffers from any unpleasantness that is the result of speech."'
