'"Bhisma said, 'O lord of men! Your maternal uncle Shakuni is equal to a single ratha. There is no doubt that he
has brought about this enmity with the Pandavas and will fight. His unassailable soldiers do not retreat from the
field of battle. They carry many kinds of strange weapons and possess the speed of the wind. Drona's son is a great
archer and is superior to all archers. He is colourful in the field of battle and is a maharatha who is firm in wielding
weapons. O great king! When released from his bow, his arrows are like those of the wielder of the Gandiva himself and are linked together in one continuous line. But I cannot count this brave one in the list of supreme rathas,
though this greatly famous one is capable of burning up the three worlds. He has accumulated anger and energy
through austerities, while he dwelled in a hermitage. And since he was generous, Drona bestowed celestial
weapons on him. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O supreme among kings! But he has a single great taint and
because of that, I do not regard him as a ratha or an atiratha. He loves his own life too much. This brahmana always wishes for a long life. There is no one who is equal to him in either army. On a single chariot, he is capable
of slaying even the army of the gods. Through the slapping of his arms, this handsome one can cause mountains to
be shattered. The brave one has an infinite number of qualities. He is a striker and his radiance is terrible. He
roams around and cannot be tolerated. He is like the god of death, with a staff in his hand. He is greatly intelligent
and has the neck of a lion. He is like the angry fire that rages at the end of an era. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is capable of pacifying what is left of this war.

'"'His father is immensely energetic. Though he is aged, he is superior to those who are younger. I have no
doubt that he will accomplish great deeds in the field of battle. A fire will be kindled from the force of his weapons
and the soldiers will be like deadwood. This will burn down the soldiers of Pandu's sons, resolved as they are on
victory. This bull among men is a leader among all the leaders of rathas. He is the son of Bharadvaja. For the sake
of your welfare, he will be the performer of terrible deeds. This aged preceptor is the teacher of all those who have
been consecrated[As kings.]. He will bring about the end of the Srinjayas, but Dhananjaya is his beloved. The great archer
will never kill Partha, the performer of unsullied deeds. He will remember his role as a preceptor and the blazing
qualities obtained by him[Arjuna.] and will never kill him. The brave one has always praised Partha's many qualities.
Bharadvaja[Meaning Drona, or Bhaaradvaja, Bharadvaja's son.] looks upon him as more than his own son. On a single chariot, the powerful one can use his divine
weapons to slay the gods, the gandharvas and the danavas, even when they are united in the field of battle.

'"'O king! I regard Pourava, tiger among kings, as a maharatha. It is my view that he is a valiant ratha who can
destroy the chariots of enemy heroes. With his own large army, he will scorch the forces of the enemy. He will
burn the Panchalas down, like the one with black trails burns deadwood. The prince Satyavrata is supreme among
rathas and is a maharatha. O king! He will stride amidst the enemy's forces, like time. O Indra among kings! His
warriors will roam around, in diverse armour and weapons. They will roam around in battle, destroying your enemies. Karna's son, Vrishasena, is foremost among ratha and is a maharatha. He is supremely strong among strong
ones and will destroy the forces of the enemy. O king! Jalasandha of Magadha is one of your supreme rathas and is
greatly energetic. He is the destroyer of enemy heroes and will lay down his life in battle. He is skilled in riding on
the shoulders of elephants and will fight in the battle. Or the mighty-armed one will fight from chariots and will
destroy the forces of the enemy. O great king! It is my view that this bull among men is a ratha. For your sake, he
will lay down his life, and that of his soldiers, in the great battle. He is a valiant warrior and is colourful in battle.
O king! He will cast aside his fear and fight with the enemies.

'"'O king! It is my view that Bahlika, who cannot be restrained in battle, is an atiratha. The brave one is like
Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] equal in battle. He will never retreat from the field of battle. O king! Like a storm, he will always
attack the enemy in battle. O great king! The general Satyavat is a maharatha. He is a charioteer who performs extraordinary feats in war and destroys the chariots of enemies. He will never be seen to be distressed at the prospect
of battle. He will astound the enemy who are arrayed in the path of his chariot. The virtuous one will perform
valiant deeds. That supreme man will be the performer of extremely great exploits in your cause.

'"'Alayudha is an Indra among rakshasas. He is the performer of cruel deeds and is extremely strong. O king!
He will remember his earlier enmity[Because Bhima killed several rakshasas.] and kill the enemy. He is the supreme ratha among all the soldiers of the
rakshasas. He possesses the powers of maya and, firm in his enmity, will roam around in battle.

'"'The brave and powerful Bhagadatta is from Pragjyotisha. He is a skilled ratha and is foremost among those
who wield a goad on an elephant. In earlier times, there was a war between him and the wielder of the Gandiva. O
king! That lasted over many days and each desired to be victorious over the other. O Gandhari's son! Subsequently, because of his friendship with the chastiser of Paka[Indra is the chastiser of Paka and Indra was Bhagadatta's friend, while Arjuna was Indra's son.], he concluded an alliance with the great-souled Pandava.
This king is skilled in fighting from the shoulders of elephants and he will fight in this war, like Vasava, king of the
gods, on Airavata.'"'
