'Brihadashva said, "After Varshneya left, because of Punyashloka's gambling, Pushkara robbed him of his kingdom and whatever other riches remained. O king! When Nala had lost his kingdom, Pushkara laughingly told him,
'Let our gambling continue. But what else do you have left as stake? Damayanti alone is left to you. Everything
else has been won by me. If you think it proper, let Damayanti be your stake now.' Thus addressed by Pushkara,
Punyashloka was enraged. His heart seemed to be rent asunder and he said nothing in reply. Then the immensely
famous Nala was driven by great anger. He looked at Pushkara and took off the ornaments from everywhere on his
body. He wore only a single garment and was unclothed, increasing the misery of his well-wishers. Then, discarding his great prosperity, the king went out. Damayanti followed him, also attired in a single garment. With her,
Nishadha spent three nights outside[Outside the city.].

'"O great king! Pushkara had an announcement made in the city. 'I will put to death anyone who sides with
Nala.' O Yudhishthira! Because of Pushkara's words and because of his hatred, none of the citizens displayed any
homage towards him[Nala.]. Thus, though he was deserving of respect, he received no respect, though he was near the
city. The king lived there for three nights, surviving only on water.

'"After several days had passed, Nala began to suffer from hunger. He saw some birds and their plumage
seemed to be made of gold. The powerful lord of Nishadha began to think that this would be his food now and also
his riches[The flesh would be his food and the plumage his riches.]. He then covered them with the garment he was wearing. All of them grasped that garment and ascended into the sky. When they rose up, the birds saw Nala standing on the ground, naked, miserable and with his
face downcast. They uttered these words, 'O greatly foolish one! We are the dice. We came here to take away your
garment. For we would have found no pleasure had you gone away with your garment.' On seeing the dice depart
and himself naked, King Punyashloka told Damayanti, 'O unblemished one! These are the ones whose wrath
robbed me of my riches. I cannot find a means of livelihood. I am miserable and hungry. Because of them, those of
the Nishadha kingdom show me no homage. They have now become birds and have robbed me of my garment. I
am your husband and face this great calamity. I am miserable and have lost my senses. Listen to my words, because they are for your own welfare. There are many roads here that head in a southern direction. They pass Avanti
and Mount Rikshavat. There is the great mountain range of Vindhya and the river Payoshni that flows into the
ocean. There are the hermitages of maharshis, with a lot of flowers and fruit. This road leads to Vidarbha and that
one goes to Koshala. Beyond them, towards the south, is the region of Dakshinapatha[The southern part of India, the region of the Deccan.].' Damayanti was oppressed by grief and her voice was choked with tears. She spoke these piteous words to Nishadha, 'O king! My
heart trembles and my limbs are going numb, as I repeatedly think about your resolution. You have lost your kingdom. You have lost your riches. You are naked, hungry and fatigued. How can I leave you in this secluded forest
and leave? O great king! When you are fatigued and hungry and think about your earlier happiness in this terrible
forest, I will reduce your misery. I tell you truthfully. It is the view of physicians that for all kinds of misery, there
is no medicine that is equal to a wife.' Nala replied, 'O Damayanti! O slim-waisted one! What you have said is
certainly true. When a man is in misery, there is no medicine or friend equal to a wife. O timid one! Why are you
afraid? I do not wish to abandon you. O unblemished one! I would abandon myself before abandoning you.'

Damayanti said, 'O great king! If you did not wish to abandon me, why did you point out the road that leads in the
direction of Vidarbha? O king! I also know that you should not abandon me. O lord of the earth! But since your
mind is deluded, you might choose to do that. O supreme among men! You have repeatedly pointed out the road to
me. O one with the radiance of immortals! That is the reason my sorrow is increasing. O king! If it is your intention that I should go to Vidarbha, then if you so desire, let us go there together. O one who shows respect! The king
of Vidarbha will show you homage. O king! Honoured by him, you will dwell happily in our house.'"'
