Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When the arrayed armies clashed against each other, how did Partha advance
against the samshaptakas and Karna against the Pandavas? You are skilled in narrating. Please tell me everything
about the battle. I am never satisfied with hearing about the valour of the brave ones in battle."

'Sanjaya replied, "Because of the evil policies of your son, Arjuna created a vyuha as a counter vyuha, having
seen that the large army of the enemy had been stationed. That large army[Of the Pandavas.] was full of horse riders, elephants,
foot soldiers and chariots. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, its formation was magnificient. Parshata's horses
had the complexion of pigeons and he was as resplendent as the moon and the sun. With his bow, he was like
Death personified. Droupadi's sons were stationed next to Parshata, wishing to fight. With terrible bodies, they followed him, like large numbers of stars after the moon.

' "In the battle, on seeing that the samshaptakas were arranged in a formation, Arjuna angrily attacked them,
stretching the bow named Gandiva. Wishing to kill him, the samshaptakas also attacked Partha. They were firm in
their resolution of obtaining victory and preferred death to retreat. Those brave ones advanced against Arjuna and
they possessed large numbers of horses, crazy elephants and chariots. The clash between them and Kiriti was tumultuous. We have heard about his encounter with the nivatakavachas[Described in Section 35 (Volume 3).] and it was like that. Partha sliced down
the heads of thousands of the enemy and brought down chariots, horses, standards, elephants, foot soldiers, the
leaders of rathas, arrows, bows, swords, chakras and battleaxes, in addition to arms with upraised weapons and
other weapons that had not yet been raised. He was submerged in that large whirlpool of soldiers, like an eddy that
swirls in the nether regions. The samshaptakas were delighted that his chariot was thus submerged and roared. But
Bibhatsu slaughtered the ones who were in front of him, those that were further away, those that were to the rear,
those that were to the right and those that were to the left. He was like an angry Rudra amidst animals.

' "O venerable one! The battle that commenced between the Panchalas, the Chedis and the Srinjayas and those
who were on your side was extremely terrible. Kripa, Kritavarma and Shakuni Soubala were with soldiers who
were cheerful, but extremely enraged. They were strikers who could bring down arrays of chariots. Those bravest
of the brave were irresistible in battle and fought with the Kosalas, the Kashis, the Matsyas, the Karushas, the
Kekayas and the Shurasenas. That fierce battle destroyed bodies and sins. Those brave shudras, vaishyas and kshatriyas obtained dharma, heaven and fame. O bull among the Bharata lineage! With his brothers, Duryodhana protected the foremost among the Kurus and the maharathas from Madra. In that battle, the Pandavas, the Panchalas
and Satyaki fought with Karna, who was protected by the brave ones among the Kurus. Karna used his sharp arrows to slaughter that large army and crushed the best of chariots. He then afflicted Yudhishthira. He[Karna.] severed
the arrows, weapons and bodies of thousands of the enemy, thus ensuring heaven and fame for them and greatly
delighting those on his side."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! How did Karna penetrate the army of the Parthas, create that destruction of
men and afflict the king? Tell me everything about this. Who were the foremost among the Parthas who fought
against Karna and resisted him? Whom did Adhiratha's son have to crush before afflicting Yudhishthira?"

'Sanjaya replied, "On seeing that the Parthas, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, were stationed, Karna, the
destroyer of enemies, spiritedly attacked the Panchalas. O great king! Like swans heading towards the giant ocean,
desiring victory, the Panchalas also quickly rushed against him. There was the blare of thousands of conch shells,
piercing the heart. From either side, there was the fierce sound of drums. There were the sounds of many musical
instruments and the noise emitted by elephants, horses and chariots. The brave ones roared like lions and it became
terrible. It was as if the earth, with its mountains, trees and oceans, the sky, with clouds tossed around by the wind,
and the firmament, with its moon, planets and nakshatras, seemed to be whirled around because of that sound. All
the beings thought that the sound was distressing. Those that possessed limited spirit died and fell down. Karna
was extremely enraged and swiftly released his weapons. He slaughtered the Pandava soldiers, like Maghavan
against the asuras. He quickly penetrated the Pandava chariots and shot his arrows, killing seventy-seven of the
foremost among the Prabhadrakas. The best of rathas next used twenty-five sharp arrows that were well tufted to
kill twenty-five Panchala rathas. He used gold-tufted iron arrows that were capable of penetrating bodies to slaughter hundreds and thousands of Chedis. He performed superhuman deeds in that encounter. O great king! The Panchalas advanced on their chariots and surrounded him from all sides. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Affixing five arrows that were extremely difficult to withstand, Vaikartana Vrisha Karna killed five Panchalas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, he killed the Panchalas Bhanudeva, Chitrasena, Senavindu,
Tapana and Shurasena. In that great battle, while the brave Panchalas were being slaughtered by the arrows, great
lamentations arose among the Panchalas. Those lamentations covered all the directions and Karna swiftly killed
them with his arrows. O venerable one! The protectors of Karna's chariot wheels were his invincible sons, Sushena
and Satyasena, who were ready to give up their lives in the fight. Karna's eldest son, maharatha Vrishasena, himself protected him from the rear and guarded Karna's back. Wishing to kill Radheya, the strikers, Dhrishtadyumna,
Satyaki, Droupadi's sons, Vrikodara, Janamejaya, Shikhandi, the brave ones among the Prabhadrakas, the Chedis,
the Panchalas and the armoured Matsyas attacked him. They showered down many kinds of arrows and weapons.
They showered down and oppressed him, like clouds pouring down on a mountain during the rainy season. O
king! Wishing to save their father, the strikers who were Karna's sons and other brave ones on your side, repulsed
those valiant ones.

' "Sushena severed Bhimasena's bow with a broad-headed arrow. He then pierced Bhima in the chest with seven
iron arrows and roared. Having picked up another bow that was firmer, Vrikodara, who was terrible in his valour,
strung it and severed Sushena's bow. He angrily pierced him with nine arrows and seemed to be dancing around.
He swiftly pierced Karna with seventy-three sharp arrows. While all his well-wishers looked on, he struck Karna's
son, Satyasena, with ten arrows and brought him down, together with his horses, charioteer, standard and weapons.
His beautiful face was like the full moon. The head was struck down with a kshurapra arrow and was like a lotus
severed from its stalk. Having killed Karna's son, Bhima again afflicted those on your side. He severed the bows of
Kripa and Hardikya and oppressed them. He pierced Duhshasana with three iron arrows and Shakuni with six. The
lord deprived Uluka and Patatri of their chariots[Both Uluka and Patatri were Shakuni's sons.]. He next picked up an arrow and said, 'O Sushena! You have
been killed.' However, Karna severed this and struck him[Bhima.] with three arrows. At this, Bhima picked up another
arrow that was well shafted and extremely energetic. He released this at Sushena, but Vrisha severed that too.
Wishing to save his son and cruelly desiring to kill the cruel one[Bhima.], Karna again struck Bhimasena with seventy-
three arrows. Sushena picked up another supreme bow that was capable of bearing a greater load. He struck Naku-
la, in the arms and in the chest, with five arrows. Nakula pierced him back with twenty firm arrows that were capable of bearing a great load and roared powerfully, causing fright to Karna. O great king! At this, maharatha
Sushena pierced him with ten swift arrows and used a kshurapra arrow to quickly sever his bow. Nakula became
senseless with anger and picked up another bow. In that encounter, he repulsed Sushena with many arrows. O king!
That slayer of enemy heroes enveloped all the directions with his arrows. Having killed Sushena's charioteer, he
pierced him with three arrows. Using three broad-headed arrows, he shattered his firm bow into three fragments.
Sushena became senseless with rage and picked up another bow. He pierced Nakula with sixty arrows and Sahadeva with seven. That extremely wonderful and fierce battle was like that between the gods and the asuras. Wishing
to kill each other, they quickly struck each other with arrows. Satyaki killed Vrishasena's charioteer with three arrows. With a broad-headed arrow, he severed his bow and struck his horses with seven. He shattered his standard
with an arrow and struck him in the chest with three. Thus struck, he[Vrishasena.] became senseless on his chariot, but
raised himself in a short while. Wishing to slay Shini's descendant, he rushed against him with a sword and a
shield. Satyaki also swiftly rushed against Vrishasena and used ten arrows, with heads like the ears of a boar, to
strike his sword and shield. Duhshasana saw that he[Vrishasena.] was without a chariot and devoid of weapons. He quickly
picked him up on his own chariot and then made him ascend another chariot. Thus, maharatha Vrishasena stationed himself on another chariot. The invincible one fought for Karna's sake and again protected his rear. Shini's
descendant struck Duhshasana with ninety-nine swift arrows. Having deprived him of his charioteer, horses and
chariot, he struck him in the forehead with three arrows. At this, he[Duhshasana.] ascended another chariot that had been
duly prepared earlier, and stationing himself within Karna's army, began to fight with the Pandus. Dhrishtadyumna
pierced Karna with ten arrows. Droupadi's sons pierced him with seventy-three and Yuyudhana with seven. Bhimasena pierced him with sixty-four arrows and Sahadeva with five. Nakula pierced him with three hundred arrows, Shatanika with seven, the brave Shikhandi with ten and Dharmaraja with one hundred. O Indra among
kings! These, and many other, brave ones desired victory.

' "In the great battle, they struck the son of the suta, the great archer. The son of the suta pierced each of them
back with ten arrows. The brave one, the destroyer of enemies, roamed around on his beautiful chariot and struck
them back. O great king! We witnessed the valour of the weapons and the dexterity of the great-souled Karna. It
was extraordinary. One did not witness a gap between the maharatha's picking up an arrow, affixing it and releasing it. The sky, the firmament, the earth and the directions were quickly enveloped by his arrows. It was as if the
sky was covered with beautiful red clouds. With the bow in his hand, the powerful Radheya seemed to be dancing
around. Everyone who struck him was pierced back with three times the number of arrows. Yet again, he pierced
each of them, with their horses, charioteers, standards and umbrellas, with ten arrows each and roared. They had to
yield and let him pass. The great archer Radheya, the afflicter of enemies, drove them away with his showers of
arrows and without any hindrance, penetrated the king's[Yudhishthira's.] division. He slaughtered three hundred Chedi rathas
who refused to retreat. Radheya then used sharp arrows to strike Yudhishthira. O king! The Pandavas, Shikandi
and Satyaki wished to save the king from Radheya and surrounded him. And all the soldiers on your side surrounded Karna, the great archer who was irresistible in battle, in every direction. O lord of the earth! The roar of
many kinds of musical instruments arose. The brave and unretreating ones roared like lions. Without any fear, the
Kurus and the Pandavas clashed again. Yudhishthira was at the forefront of the Parthas and the son of the suta was
at our head." '
