Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the sons of Dhritarashtra and Pandu had
become masters in the use of arms, Drona spoke to King Dhritarashtra, lord of men, in the presence of Kripa, Somadatta, Bahlika, the wise son of Ganga[Bhishma.], Vyasa and Vidura, "O king! O supreme among the Kurus! The princes
have now completed their learning. O king! With your permission, let them now display what they have learned."

The great king replied with gladness in his heart, "O best of the Brahmanas! O Bharadvaja[Drona was the sage Bharadvaja's son.]! You have accomplished a great task. You should yourself order me about how to arrange the display, the time and the place and
about the rules to be followed. Today, I grieve for my blindness and envy men who possess eyesight. They will
now be able to witness the prowess of my sons with weapons. O kshatta[Vidura.]! O one who is devoted to dharma! Follow the instructions of this teacher and preceptor. I can't think of anything that will be more agreeable to me."

Thereupon, Vidura excused himself from the king's presence and went out.

'The immensely wise son of Bharadvaja measured out a flat stretch of land that was devoid of trees and bushes,
but had wells and springs. O king! On that plot of ground, on a day when the nakshatras were auspicious, that
supreme of eloquent warriors made offerings and the reasons for that were announced in the city. A large arena
was constructed in accordance with the principles of the shastras, and equipped with diverse weapons. O bull
among men! Artisans constructed a giant viewing stand for the king and another for the women. The citizens built
many platforms. The wealthy ones constructed large and high palanquins.

'When the day arrived, the king, accompanied by his advisers, came with Bhishma and the foremost of preceptors, Kripa, leading the way. They arrived at the divine royal viewing stand, constructed out of gold leaf, decorated
with lattices of pearl-work and adorned with lapis lazuli[Vaidurya.]. O king who conquers all! Gandhari, the immensely fortunate Kunti and other ladies of the royal household arrived, dressed in beautiful garments and with their attendants. They joyfully ascended the viewing stand, like goddesses ascending Mount Meru. Brahmanas, Kshatriyas
and others of the four varnas hurriedly left the city and arrived there, wishing to witness the skills of the princes in
the use of arms. With the sound of the music that was being played and the curiosity of the assembly, the crowd
was like a giant ocean rippling with waves. Then the preceptor entered the arena with his son. He was dressed in
white garments and wore a white sacred thread. His hair and beard were white. He wore a white garland and was
anointed with white paste. It was as if the moon and Mars had entered a sky that was bereft of rain clouds. At the
appropriate time, that supreme of warriors[Drona.] rendered offerings and instructed Brahmanas who knew the rites to recite mantras. Once the auspicious and pleasant musical instruments were quiet, men entered the arena, carrying diverse weapons and equipment.

'Then the mighty bulls of the Bharata lineage[The princes.] tightened their lower garments and entered, equipped with bows,
quivers and finger protectors. With Yudhishthira leading the way, those princes, in order of their age, began to display great valour and wonderful skills in the use of weapons. Some[Some spectators.] lowered their heads, concerned that arrows
might fall on them. Other men who were not concerned looked on, in wonder and amazement. They pierced targets
with arrows that had their names engraved on them. They rode fleet-footed horses skilfully. On witnessing the
strength of the princes in the use of bows and arrows, they were amazed and thought they were in a city of the
gandharvas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hundreds and thousands of men, their eyes dilated with wonder,
cheered them on. After repeatedly demonstrating their skill in the use of bows and arrows, chariots, fighting on elephants, fighting on horses and duels, those strong ones then picked up swords and shields and began to circle one
another on the ground, exhibiting the various modes of attacking with a sword. They saw the agility, beauty, symmetry, balance, firmness of grasp and mastery in use of sword and shield.

'Then, in great spirits, Suyodhana[Duryodhana's name.] and Vrikodara entered, with clubs in their hands, like two single-peaked
mountains. Those mighty-armed warriors tightened their lower garments and roared, like two mad elephants trumpeting and contending[Over a female elephant.]. Those immensely strong ones circled each other with unblemished clubs, like mad elephants. Vidura described the feats of the princes to Dhritarashtra and the mother of the Pandavas[Kunti.] described them
to Gandhari.'
