'Yudhishthira said, "O son[The word used is tata.]! I know about the sacred texts and about this world and the next. The words of the
Vedas ask one to act and also ask one to renounce action. Though the sacred texts give reasons, they cause confusion. I know what has been certainly prescribed, following the rites. You are only skilled in the use of weapons and
base yourself on the conduct of heroes. You are incapable of comprehending the true meaning of the sacred texts.
Those who are learned can determine the certainty of dharma. Those who know subtleties can appreciate the true
purport of the sacred texts. If you had actually seen the nature of dharma, you would not have spoken those words
to me. But those words were spoken by you out of fraternal affection towards a brother. O Kounteya! O Arjuna!
Your words are full of reason and I am pleased with you. In the three worlds, there is no one who is your equal
amongst those who know the dharma of fighting and are accomplished in all those acts. But the words that I am
speaking about the subtlety of dharma will be difficult for you to understand. O Dhananjaya! You should not doubt
my intelligence. You know about the science of fighting, but you have not served the elders. You do not know
about the conclusions of learned ones who have considered these in their entirety. O son[The word used is tata.]! Austerities, renunciation and ritual action-those intelligent ones who have determined the way to the supreme objective have said that
each of these is superior to the preceding one[Ritual action is superior to renunciation and renunciation is superior to
austerities. There is something wrong in the text. Arjuna is the one who
has advocated ritual action, while Yudhishthira has advocated austerities.
Therefore, the ordering ought to be the other way round.]. O Partha! You are wrong when you think that there is nothing superior to wealth. I will explain to you why it is not the most important. People who follow dharma are seen to follow austerities and practice studying. The rishis who attain eternal worlds observe austerities. There are those who
have not grown beards and other wise ones who dwell in the forest. Though they are without riches, because of
their studies, they go to the infinite heaven. There are aryas who abandon the darkness that comes from lack of intelligence and disassociate themselves from objects. They follow the northern path[The path of the gods.] and go to the worlds meant
for those who renounce. You see that the southern path[The path of the ancestors. This leads to rebirth.] is radiant. This is the world of those who follow action,
but is a cremation ground. The path seen by those who desire salvation cannot be described. That is the reason renunciation is the most important, though it can only be explained with difficulty. Wise ones have followed the sacred texts, wishing to determine what is real and what is unreal, what is here and what is there. They have gone
through the words of the Vedas and the sacred texts that are the Aranyakas. They have dissected them like the
trunk of a plantain tree, but have not been able to see the essence. Some have attentively rejected and have decided
that the atman, in thisbody with the five elements, has the attributes of desire and aversion[This is a difficult shloka to understand. The body is composed of the
five elements, earth, air, water, fire and space. Rejection probably means
the rejection of some doctrines.]. It[The atman.] cannot be seen
by the eye. It cannot be expressed through words. Being driven by karma, it circulates in beings[Through the cycle of death and rebirth, and true knowledge frees one
from this cycle.]. After having
realized what is most beneficial, withdrawing all thirst from the mind and casting aside all forms of action, one becomes independent and happy. This is the subtle path traversed by virtuous ones. O Arjuna! This being the case,
why are you praising wealth, which is harmful? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In earlier times, there were
people who could see and were learned in the sacred texts. They were always devoted to constant action, donations, sacrifice and deeds. They were learned and provided reasons and it was difficult to dissuade them. But there
are foolish ones who rigidly adhere to those earlier texts. They say that it does not exist[The atman does not exist, or final emancipation does not exist. Therefore, one should devote oneself to action. These shlokas are not very easy
to understand and we have taken some liberties.]. Those eloquent ones
disregard what is immortal. They roam around the entire earth and speak in assemblies. Though they are extremely
learned, they talk a lot. If we do not recognize them, who else will? But there are extremely wise and intelligent
and virtuous ones, wise in the store of the sacred texts. They have great intelligence and perform great austerities.
O Kounteya! They follow dharma and always obtain happiness through renunciation."'
