'Duryodhana said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to the main treasures I saw at the Pandava's,
brought by the lords of the earth from everywhere. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing those riches,
grown and mined, I no longer feel myself to be conscious. Kamboja gave riches in the form of skins of eda[A kind of antelope.], fine
cat skins lined with gold, the best skins from deer, three hundred horses with parrot-like noses that were grey and
of mixed colours and three hundred she-camels fattened with palm[The word used is pilu.], pulses[The word used is shami.] and nuts[The inguda nut.]. All the govasana and
dasamiya brahmanas came to please the immensely fortunate and great-souled Dharmaraja[Govasana brahmanas look after cattle and dasamiya brahmanas are fit to be servants. When relating the story
to Shakuni, Duryodhana mentioned vatadhana brahmanas.]. They brought three
kharvas of tribute, but were barred entry, and stood at the gate. When they brought beautiful and golden water
pots[Kamandalu.] and offered their tribute in those, they were allowed entry. O great king! As tribute, the shudra kings who
lived in Bharukaccha[In Gujarat today.] brought one hundred thousand slave girls from the Karpasika region. They were dark and
slender, with long hair and adorned in golden ornaments. They also brought ranku[A kind of antelope.] hides, fit for the best of brahmanas, and horses from the Gandhara region. The men whose crops depend on the showers of Indra[That is, those who live in dry areas.], those who
are born near the mouths of rivers, along the shores and banks of oceans and rivers, the Vairamas, the Paradas, the
Vangas and the Kitavas, brought many riches and many jewels-goats, cattle, gold, donkeys, camels, honey from
fruit and different types of garments. But restrained, they stood at the door.

'"Maharatha King Bhagadatta, the brave ruler of Pragjyotisha and the strong ruler of the mlechhas, came with
yavanas. He brought a tribute of thoroughbred horses, as swift as the wind, but was barred and stood at the gate.
After presenting a receptacle that was like iron[The word used is ashma, meaning either iron or stone. The word also means sapphire, but that use is rarer.] and swords with handles of ivory, Bhagadatta of Pragjyotisha
left. I saw that many people from different directions were refused admission at the gate, though they brought rich
tributes of gold and silver-with two eyes, three eyes, one eye on the forehead, those who wore headdresses, those
who had no fixed abode, Bahukas, cannibals and those with only one foot. They brought horses that were as swift
as thought, with the colours of indragopas[A reddish insect, sometimes identified with a firefly.] and parrots, or with the colours of the rainbow[The text uses the word indrayudha, meaning Indra's weapon. The specific weapon in question is the bow and
the rainbow is known as Indra's bow.] or red like the
evening sky[The word used is sandhya, which can mean evening as well as dawn.]. They were of many shades and there were also seized forest horses[These were wild horses that had been seized, as opposed to domestically bred horses.], with the speed of the mind.

'"They also gave him[Yudhishthira.] rich tributes of the best quality of gold. There were Chinas, Hunas, Shakas[Identified as Scythians.],
Oudras[Inhabitants of Odra, today's Orissa.], those who live inside mountains, Varshneyas, Harahunas, dark ones and those who live in the Himalayas. I do not remember the order of those who were barred entry at the gate. They gave much tribute in many
forms. There were tens of thousands of asses, giant in form and with black necks. They were famous everywhere
and trained well, capable of killing hundreds. There were large and colourful garments pleasant to the touch, from
Bahlika[Identified as Bactria.] and China. There was wool, ranku[Ranku is a kind of antelope.] hides, silk, jute, cotton and thousands of other garments. They had
the colour of lotuses and were soft, though not made of cotton. There were hides. There were long and sharp
swords, double-edged swords[Rishti.], spears, battleaxes and a hundred battleaxes from the other side of the ocean[Implying the west.].
They brought juices, fragrances and many jewels in thousands. But despite the tribute, they were barred entry and
stood at the gate. Shakas, Tukharas, Kankas, Romashas[Identified as Romans.] and men with horns brought as tribute one hundred million[Arbuda.] horses that could travel great and long distances. With crores of tribute of many kinds and unlimited gold,
they stood at the door and were barred entry. Expensive seats, vehicles, beds, and many kinds of chariots adorned
with gems and gold, made of ivory and decorated with gold, well-trained horses covered with tiger skins, many
kinds of cushions, thousands of gems, narachas[Iron arrows.], half-narachas, many kinds of weapons-this was the great tribute paid by the king from the east[It is not clear who this king is. It could be Bhagadatta, but Bhagadatta went away without entering.], when he entered the great-souled Pandava's sacrificial arena."'
