'Sanjaya said, "That tumultuous battle raged on, giving rise to great fear. O great king! Dhrishtadyumna advanced
against Drona. He repeatedly tugged on the string of his supreme bow. He advanced towards Drona's chariot,
which was decorated with gold. O great king! As Dhrishtadyumna advanced, wishing to get at Drona, the Pancha-
las and the Pandavas surrounded him. On seeing that Drona, supreme among preceptors, had been surrounded,
your son made efforts to protect Drona in that battle. During that night, the two clashing armies looked like oceans.
They were like fierce oceans that had been stirred and agitated by a storm, with all the beings in them disturbed."

'"O great king! Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.] quickly pierced Drona in the chest with five arrows and roared like a lion. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, Drona pierced him with twenty-five arrows and with another
broad-headed arrow, severed his immensely radiant bow. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having been thus
pierced by Drona, Dhrishtadyumna swiftly abandoned that bow and bit his lower lip in rage. O great king! Having
become wrathful, the powerful Dhrishtadyumna picked up another excellent bow, wishing to bring about Drona's
destruction. The destroyer of enemy heroes drew the colourful bow back up to his ear. He released a fierce arrow
that was capable of taking Drona's life. In the great battle, the powerful one released that terrible arrow. It illuminated all the soldiers, as if the sun had arisen. O king! On seeing that terrible arrow, the gods, the gandharvas and
men spoke these words. 'May Drona be safe in this encounter.' O king! But before that arrow could reach the preceptor's chariot, Karna displayed the lightness of his hands and shattered it into twelve fragments. O king! O venerable one! It was thus shattered into many fragments by the son of a suta. Quickly rendered unsuccessful by Karna's arrows, that arrow fell down. Having severed the arrow in the battle with his straight-tufted arrows, in that encounter, Karna pierced Dhrishtadyumna with ten arrows. Drona's son pierced him with five, Drona himself with
seven, Shalya with nine arrows and Duhshasana with three. Duryodhana pierced him with twenty and Shakuni
with five. All the maharathas quickly pierced Panchala. For Drona's sake, he was thus pierced by seven heroes in
that battle[Karna, Ashvattahama, Shalya, Duhshasana, Duryodhana, Shakuni and Drona himself. It is seven when Drona
is included.]. O king! But without showing any fear, he pierced each of them back with three arrows. He pierced
Drona, Drona's son, Karna and your son. Thus pierced by that archer, those supreme among rathas again quickly
pierced Dhrishtadyumna in that battle, with five arrows each.

'"O king! Drumasena[This section about Drumasena hangs loose and it is not clear who this Drumasena was. There was a Drumasena who protected Shalya's chariot wheels, but he figures later, in Shalya Parva.] angrily pierced him with arrows. Asking him to wait, he again swiftly struck him with
three other arrows. He pierced him back with three fast and sharp arrows. They were gold-tufted and sharpened on
stone. They could rob warriors of their lives. He again used a broad-headed arrow to sever the valiant Drumasena's
head, with golden and blazing earrings, from his body. The teeth still bit the lower lips in anger. But in that battle,
the head fell down on the ground. It was like a ripe palm fruit, which had been brought down by the force of a
strong wind."

'"The brave one again struck those brave ones with extremely sharp arrows. Colourful in fighting, he severed
Radheya's bow with a broad-headed arrow. Karna could not tolerate the severing of his bow, like a fierce lion
whose tail has been severed. His eyes became red with rage and he sighed. He picked up another bow. He showered down a storm of arrows on the immensely strong Dhrishtadyumna. On seeing that Karna was enraged, those
brave ones, the six bulls among men[Ashvattahama, Shalya, Duhshasana, Duryodhana, Shakuni and Drona.], quickly surrounded Panchala's son, wishing to kill him. On seeing that he
was in front of those supreme warriors, all those on your side thought that Dhrishtadyumna was already within the
jaws of death. At that time, Dasharha Satyaki showered arrows and advanced to the spot where the valorous
Dhrishtadyumna was. Satyaki was a great archer and indomitable in battle. On seeing that he was advancing, Rad-
heya pierced him back with ten swift arrows. O great king! While all those brave ones looked on, Satyaki asked
him to wait and not run away, and then pierced him with ten arrows. The encounter between the powerful Satyaki
and the great-souled Karna was terrible, like that between Bali and Vasava. With the slapping of his palms, Satya-
ki, bull among the kshatriyas, frightened all the kshatriyas and pierced the lotus-eyed Karna back. O great king!
Making the earth tremble with the roar of his bow, the powerful son of a suta fought against Satyaki. Karna pierced
Shini's descendant back with hundreds of arrows-vipatha, karni, naracha, vatsadanta and kshurapra[These are different types of arrows. Kshurapras are arrows with sharp edges, vatsadantas have heads like a
calf's tooth, vipathas are large arrows, narachas are made out of iron and karnis are barbed.]. In that
way, Yuyudhana, foremost of rathas among the Vrishni lineage, showered down arrows on Karna. The encounter
between him and those on your side was wonderful and seemed to be equal. O great king! Karna's armoured
son[Vrishasena.] quickly pierced Satyaki from every direction with sharp arrows. The lord Satyaki used his weapons to
counter all their weapons and those of Karna. He angrily pierced Vrishasena between the breasts. O lord of the
earth! Pierced by that arrow, the valiant Vrishasena lost his senses. He discarded his bow and fell down on his
chariot. Karna thought that maharatha Vrishasena had been slain. He was tormented by sorrow on account of his
son and afflicted Satyaki. Maharatha Yuyudhana was oppressed by Karna. But he repeatedly struck Karna back
with many arrows and with force. He pierced Karna with ten arrows and Vrishasena with seven. Satvata severed
the bows and arm-guards of both. They[Karna and Vrishasena, Vrishasena having regained his senses.] strung other bows that were capable of terrifying the enemy and
pierced Yuyudhana from every direction with sharp arrows. That battle raged on and it was destructive of heroes.

'"O king! Surpassing all sounds, the great roar of Gandiva was heard. O king! On hearing the clatter of the chariot and the roar of Gandiva, the son of a suta spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'The great archer has killed all the
Shibis, the foremost of bulls among men and the Pouravas[There might be a typo and this could be Kouravas. However, there is no inconsistency, since Puru was a common ancestor and the Kouravas could also be referred to as the Pouravas.]. Gandiva is roaring loudly. The clatter of the chariot
can be heard and Vasava's son is roaring. It is evident that Pandava has accomplished deeds that only he himself is
capable of. O king! He will shatter this army of the Bharatas in many ways. The soldiers are being routed and no
one wishes to remain. It is as if a net of clouds is being dispelled by the wind. Approaching Savyasachi, those on
our side are being broken, like a boat on the ocean. Because of the arrows released from Gandiva, the foremost of
the warriors are fleeing. O king! As they are being routed in a hundred ways, a large uproar can be heard. O tiger
among kings! In this night, it is echoing in the sky. There are the sounds of lamentations and roars like lions'. Musical instruments and many other sounds can be heard in the vicinity of Arjuna's chariot. However, Satyaki, worst
of the Satvata lineage, is stationed in our midst. If we can attain this objective of ours[Of killing Satyaki.], all our enemies will be
defeated. This son of the king of Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.] is engaged with Drona. O king! He is surrounded on all sides by
warriors who are supreme among men. O great king! If we kill Satyaki and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, there is no
doubt about the certainty that victory will be ours. Let us surround these two brave maharathas, as we did Subhadra's son[Abhimanyu.]. O great king! Let us endeavour to kill those of the Vrishni and Parshata lineages. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Savyasachi is in front of us, advancing towards Drona's divison. He knows that Satyaki is engaged with many bulls among the Kurus. Let many foremost ones, supreme among rathas, go there, so that Partha
does not know that Satyaki has been surrounded by many. Let the brave ones quickly release fierce arrows, so that
Madhava can quickly go to the world of the hereafter.' O king! Knowing this to be Karna's view, your son spoke to
Soubala in that encounter, like Indra speaking to the illustrious Vishnu. 'Surrounded by tens of thousands of elephants that do not retreat and surrounded by ten thousand chariots, go to where Dhananjaya is. Duhshasana,
Durvishaha, Subahu and Dushpradharshana will follow you, surrounded by many foot soldiers. O mighty-armed
one! O maternal uncle! O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Since this is within quotes, there is no reason for Shakuni to be addressed as a descendant of the Bharata
lineage.]! Kill the two Krishnas, Dharmaraja, Nakula, Sahadeva and Bhimasena. My hopes of victory depend on you, like those of the gods on Indra of the gods. O maternal uncle! Slay the Kounteyas, like Pavaka's son[Kartikeya.] against the asuras.' O lord! Having been thus addressed by
your son, Soubala went to where the Parthas were, with a large army and with your sons. For the welfare of your
sons, he wished to consume the sons of Pandu.

'"When Soubala departed towards the army of the Pandavas, a battle commenced between those on your side
and the enemy. With a large army, the son of a suta advanced against Satvata. He advanced rapidly in that battle
and showered many arrows. All those on the Pandava side surrounded Satyaki. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! During that night, the great-souled Drona fought a great battle against the brave Dhrishtadyumna and the
Panchalas."'
