Vaishampayana said, 'Those brave ones girded their swords and were armed with other weapons. Their quivers
were tied. They had guards on their fingers and wrists. They proceeded towards the river Kalindi[There are different rivers named Kalindi. This Kalindi is another name for the Yamuna, which flows down from
the Kalinda mountain and is therefore described as Kalinda's daughter, or Kalindi.]. On foot, they
arrived at its southern bank. The archers lived there, finding fortifications in the mountains and the forests. The immensely strong great archers shot many different kinds of deer. To the north of Dasharna and the south of Pancha-
la, the Pandavas passed through Yakrilloma and Shurasena. Attired as hunters, they entered Matsya from the direction of the forest. Having reached that country, Krishna told the king, "Behold. Many footpaths and different kinds
of fields can be seen here. It is clear that Virata's capital is still far away. My fatigue is extremely great. Let us
spend the night here." Yudhishthira replied, "O Dhananjaya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Lift Panchali
and carry her. Once we free ourselves from this forest, we will settle down in the capital." Like a king of elephants,
Arjuna swiftly raised Droupadi up. Arjuna put her down when they reached the outskirts of the capital. On arriving
at the capital, Kounteya[Yudhishthira.] asked Arjuna, "Before entering the city, where will we keep our weapons? O son[The word used is tata.]! If
we enter the city with our weapons, there is no doubt that we will create anxiety among the people. We have made
a promise that even if one of us happens to be discovered, we will have to return to the forest again for twelve
years." Arjuna said, "O Indra among men! On this peak and close to the cremation ground, there is a gigantic shami tree[A kind of tree believed to contain fire inside.]. It is impenetrable because of its fearsome branches and is difficult to climb. O king! Not a single man
can be seen here. It is far away from the road and has grown in a forest frequented by animals and predators. Let us
hang up our weapons there and then proceed towards the city. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We will then
be able to enjoy ourselves as we please." O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having thus addressed King Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, he took off his weapons there.

'Partha, descendant of the Kuru lineage, loosened the string of the terrible Gandiva, which made a great roar and
slaughtered masses of enemies. With it, alone on a chariot, he had vanquished gods, men and snakes and conquered many opulent countries. Yudhishthira, the brave scorcher of enemies, loosened the bow's undecaying
string, one with which he had protected Kurukshetra[All of them loosened the strings of their respective bows.]. Lord Bhimasena loosened the string of the bow with which
he had defeated the Panchalas in battle and with which, he alone, had conquered many enemies in the course of his
conquest. Enemies were pacified in battle because of the twang of that bow. Mountains were rent asunder with the
twang of Bhimasena's bow, which was like that of thunder. O unblemished one! He had used it to oppress the king
of Saindhava[The king of Saindhava is Jayadratha. Jayadratha had abducted Droupadi, the incident having been described in
Section 42 (Volume 3). Once Jayadratha had been defeated, Bhimasena had used his bow to drag Jayadratha by the
neck.]. The brave Pandava who had roared in battle, loosened the string of the bow with which he had
conquered the west[This is a reference to Nakula.]. The brave lord Sahadeva, whose conduct was honest[The text uses the word dakshinachara. The straightforward translation is that his conduct (achara) was honest,
skilful, amiable and courteous (dakshina). However, in worshipping Shakti, dakshinachara refers to purer rituals
that use the right hand, as opposed to use of the left hand (vamachara).], loosened the string of the weapon
with which he had conquered the southern direction. With the bows, they laid down their long and yellow swords,
their extremely expensive quivers and arrows that were as sharp as razors. Having himself climbed the tree, Naku-
la deposited these bows. He tied them firmly with strong nooses to those branches that were extremely strong and
wide and where he saw that showers of rain would not enter. The Pandavas also tied a dead body there, so that
people would smell the stench of a corpse and avoid the shami tree from a distance. While they were tying the
corpse to the tree, the scorchers of enemies were questioned by cowherds and herdsmen. They said, "This is our
mother, who is one hundred and eighty years old. This is the dharma of our lineage, one that has been followed by
our ancestors." Then the Parthas, the destroyers of enemies, approached the city.

'Yudhishthira gave them the names they would secretly address each other by-Jaya, Jayanta, Vijaya, Jayatsena
and Jayadbala. In accordance with the promise that they had made, they entered the great city, to live in disguise in
that kingdom for the thirteenth year.'
