Vaishampayana said, 'O  supreme among kings! Hearing  Kunti's  words,  the  Pandavas  were  ashamed[They were ashamed because their request was unreasonable.].  With
Panchali, the unblemished ones returned. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing Kunti go away, a
great uproar of lamentation arose from the women of the inner quarters. Having been unable to persuade Pritha to
return, the Pandavas circumambulated the king[Dhritarashtra.] and withdrew. The great king, Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, supported himself on Gandhari and Vidura and spoke. "It is better for the queen who is Yudhishthira's mother to return. Everything that Yudhishthira has said is the truth. The prosperity of her sons is great and there are great fruits
there. Why should one foolishly abandon one's sons and proceed to the forest along impassable ways? She can
perform austerities in the kingdom. She can perform austerities, give gifts and observe vows. She is capable of doing this and not doing it would be bad policy. Let her listen to my words. O Gandhari! I am satisfied with the service  of  my  daughter-in-law.  O  one  who  knows  about  dharma!  Therefore,  you  should  give  her  permission  to
return." Thus addressed by the king, Subala's daughter spoke to Kunti. She repeated everything that the king had
said and also added her own words. However, the queen[Kunti.] had made up her mind to reside in the forest. Kunti was
virtuous and devoted to dharma and it was impossible to dissuade her. The women of the Kuru lineage discerned
that she was firm in her resolution. On seeing that the best of the Kuru lineage[The Pandavas and their retinue.] had withdrawn, they began to
weep. The Parthas and all the women from the inner quarters returned. The immensely wise king, Dhritarashtra,
proceeded to the forest.

'The Pandavas were distressed and overcome by sorrow and grief. With the women, all of them used their vehicles to return to the city. The city of Hastinapura, with its women, aged and young, was completely silent and there
were no festivities. All the Pandavas were angry and also disinterested. Without Kunti, they were extremely miserable, like calves separated from their mother.

'The same day, Dhritarashtra reached a place that was some distance away. The lord resided there, on the banks
of the Bhagirathi. The best of brahmanas, accomplished in the Vedas, followed the prescribed rites and kindled a
sacrificial fire, in a spot that had ascetics. A sacrificial fire was also lit for the aged king. Following the ordinances,
the king offered oblations into the fire. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With evening having arrived, he worshipped the one with the one thousand rays. Vidura and Sanjaya used kusha grass to prepare a bed for the king, the
brave one among the Kurus. Not very far from that, they prepared another one for Gandhari. Yudhishthira's mother, Kunti, was devoted to virtuous vows. She lay down on a bed of kusha grass, not far from Gandhari. Vidura and
the others slept within a hearing distance. As instructed, the brahmanas and the officiating priests also followed
suit. The foremost among the brahmanas kindled a fire and chanted. That night was as pleasurable as a brahmi
night[A brahmi night is a specific night during which sacred ceremonies are performed throughout the night.]. When night was over, they performed their morning ablutions. Following the rites, all of them offered
oblations into the fire and proceeded again. Still fasting, they glanced towards the northern direction. That first
day's residence had been miserable. They had sorrowed. The inhabitants of the city and the countryside had also
grieved.'
