Janamejaya asked, 'O sage! When the great king Dhritarashtra heard that Duryodhana and all the soldiers had been
killed, what did he do? What did the great-minded Kourava king, Dharma's son[Yudhishthira.], and the other three, Kripa and
the others[Kripa, Kritavarma and Ashvatthama.], do? I have heard about Ashvatthama's deed and the curses that were imposed on each other[Ashvatthama was cursed. His imposing a curse refers to his act of destroying the foetus in Uttara's womb.]. Tell me
what happened next and what Sanjaya said.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'When his one hundred sons had been killed, Dhritarashtra, the lord of the earth, was
miserable and tormented by sorrow on account of his sons. He was like a tree deprived of its branches. He was
deep in reflection and overcome by his thoughts. The immensely wise Sanjaya went to him and spoke these words.

"O great king! Why are you grieving? Sorrowing does not help. O lord of the earth! Eighteen akshouhinis have
been destroyed. The earth has been rendered bare and is almost empty. The lords of men had assembled from many
directions and many countries. With your sons, all of them have confronted their death. It is necessary to perform
the funeral rites of the fathers, the sons, the grandsons, kin, well-wishers and preceptors, in the due order." On
hearing those piteous words, the invincible one[Dhritarashtra.] was afflicted because of the death of his sons and grandsons and
fell down on the ground, like a tree struck by a storm.

'Dhritarashtra said, "My sons have been killed. My advisers have been killed. All my well-wishers have been
killed. It is certain that I will roam around the earth in grief. Bereft of my relatives, how will I now live this life? I
am like a decayed and aged bird whose wings have been clipped. I have lost my kingdom. My well-wishers have
been slain. I am blind too. O immensely wise one! I am like the one with rays[The sun.], when it is dim and does not shine. I
did not listen to the words of the well-wishers, or the advice of Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.], devarshi Narada, or Krishna
Dvaipayana. In the midst of the assembly hall, Krishna spoke beneficial words to me. 'O king! There has been
enough of enmity. Restrain your sons.' Because I was evil-minded, I disregarded those words and it torments me
severely. I did not listen to the words, full of dharma, that Bhishma spoke. On hearing about Duryodhana's death,
when he was roaring like a bull, and of Duhshasana's slaughter, Karna's catastrophe and the setting of the sun that
was Drona, my heart has been shattered. O Sanjaya! I am suffering like a fool. I do not recall any evil deeds that I
have performed, which could lead to these fruits now. It is certain that I have committed sins in my earlier lives.
Because of that, the creator has acted so as to give me this share of grief. This consequence of the destruction of
my friends and all my relatives, the destruction of my well-wishers and allies, has been brought about by destiny.
Where is another man on this earth who is as miserable as I am? Therefore, the Pandavas will now see me, rigid in
my vows, following the long road that extends towards Brahma's world."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus did he lament, thinking about his many sorrows. To dispel the king's sorrows, Sanjaya spoke these words. "O king! O best among kings! Abandon your grief. You have heard about the certainty of
the Vedas and the sacred texts from many seniors and about what the sages told Srinjaya in ancient times, when he
was tormented by grief on account of his son[The Critical edition does not tell us who Srinjaya was, what the sages told him, and
when Dhritarashtra heard it. The story has been excised from this part of the Critical
edition and is about a king named Srinjaya, whose son was killed by thieves. Narada
consoled him by telling him the histories of sixteen kings who had to die. But Narada's account appears later.]. O king! When your son was young and insolent, you disregarded
the words that were spoken to you by your well-wishers. You were avaricious and desired the fruits and did not act
in accordance with what was good for you. Your advisers were Duhshasana, the evil-souled Radheya[Karna.], the evil-
souled Shakuni and the evil-minded Chitrasena[Duryodhana's brother.]. They were thorns and they made the entire world full of thorns
for themselves[The text uses the word shalya, which means thorn or stake. Shalya was also the king
of Madra and it is also possible to interpret the shloka in the sense of Shalya, as a
proper noun. However, there is no suggestion that Shalya ever offered advice to
Dhritarashtra and that it was rejected, though Shalya eventually fought on the side
of the Kouravas. We have therefore taken the word shalya to be a common noun.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your son did not act in accordance with the words of
Bhishma, eldest among the Kurus, or Gandhari, or Vidura. He did not act virtuously, in accordance with dharma.
Instead, he always spoke of war. He took all the kshatriyas to their destruction and increased the fame of the enemies. You were in the midst as a neutral and did not say anything that should have been said. You were the main
beast of burden, but you did not bear your proportionate load. Right from the beginning, a man should adopt the
appropriate course of action. One should not strive for something earlier, which one has to repent later. O king!
Because of your affection towards your son, you were only interested in pleasing him. You have subsequently arrived at a state of repentance and you should not sorrow. There are those who only see the honey and not the fall.
Like you, they sorrow when their greed for honey dislodges them[The image is that of a man who climbs a tree for honey and falls down.]. One who searches for gain obtains sorrow.
One who sorrows does not obtain happiness. One who sorrows does not obtain prosperity. One who sorrows does
not obtain the supreme objective. A man who starts a fire and then covers it up in a garment, sorrows when he is
scorched. Such a person is not regarded as learned. The Parthas were a fire. You and your sons fanned it with the
wind of your words. You sprinkled the flames with the clarified butter of your greed. When it was kindled, your
sons fell into it like insects. They were scorched by Keshava's flames. You should not sorrow. O king! Tears are
flowing down from your face. This is not in accordance with the sacred texts and the learned ones do not praise it.
It is said that they are like sparks and scorch men. Therefore, use your intelligence to conquer your anger. Get a
grip on yourself." O scorcher of enemies! When the great-souled Sanjaya had consoled him in this way, Vidura
showed his earlier intelligence and again spoke to him.'
