Maheshvara said, "O one who knows about the supreme! O one who knows about dharma! O one who resides in hermitages! O virtuous one! O one with the excellent brows! O one with beautiful tips of the
hair! O daughter of the Himalaya mountain! O accomplished one! O one who possesses tranquility and self-control! O one who has no sense of ownership! O one who follows dharma! O beautiful one! I am asking you. I wish
to ask you about something. Tell me. Savitri is Brahma's virtuous wife, Shachi is Koushika's[Koushika is one of Indra's names.]  virtuous wife,
Dhumorni is the wife of Martanda's son[Meaning Yama.], Riddhi is Vaishravana's[Kubera's.] wife, Gouri is Varuna's wife, Suvarchala is
Surya's wife, Rohini is the virtuous wife of the moon, Svaha is the wife of Vibhavasu[Agni.] and Aditi is the wife of
Kashyapa. All of them regard their husbands as gods. O goddess! You have always spoken to all of them and have
asked them. O one who knows about dharma! O one who speaks about dharma! That is the reason I am asking
you. I wish to hear about the dharma of women, which you also follow vis-à-vis me. You observe dharma with me.
Your conduct is similar to mine. Your vows are similar to mine. Your attributes and energy are similar to mine.
You have performed terrible austerities. Whatever you speak to me will become a yardstick. This will be specific
to women and will always be the objective of women. O Gouri! O one with the beautiful hips! This will always be
observed on earth and be established in all the worlds. Your body is half of my body. It has emerged from half of
my body. You are the one who performs the tasks of the gods. You are the one who caused the worlds to have offspring. O beautiful one! You know everything about the eternal dharma of women. Therefore, in detail, tell me
about the specific dharma of women."

'"'Uma replied, "O illustrious one! O lord of all beings! O creator of the past, the present and the future! O god!
It is because of your powers that these words are manifesting themselves before me. O lord of the gods! These
rivers, with the waters of all the tirthas, have approached near you, so that you can touch their waters. After consulting them, I will progressively tell you everything[Most, though not all, rivers are feminine.]. Purusha is said to be someone who possesses the powers,
but has no sense of ego[The allusion seems to be that Shiva knew the answer, but asked Uma, because of lack of ego.]. O lord of creatures! Women always tend to follow other women. These rivers will therefore be honoured by me. This sacred river, Sarasvati, is supreme among all rivers. This is the foremost among all
rivers and heads towards the ocean. There are Vipasha, Vitasta, Chandrabhaga, Iravati, Shatadru, Devika, Sindhu,
Koushiki, Gomati and the river of the gods, which has all the tirthas and is the supreme rivers which has come
down to earth from heaven, the goddess Ganga." This is what the wife of the god among the gods, supreme among
the upholders of dharma, said. She first smiled and then addressed all those rivers. Devoted to dharma, the goddess
and queen asked them about the dharma of women. All of them, with Ganga, supreme among rivers, as the foremost, were accomplished about the dharma of women. Uma said, "The illustrious one has asked a question about
the dharma of women. I wish to speak to Shankara after I have consulted you. I do not see any knowledge on earth
that is possessed by one single individual. Whether you are in heaven, or whether you head towards the ocean, I
am therefore showing you respect."'"

'Bhishma continued, "Those best among rivers were auspicious and extremely sacred and were thus asked. They
appointed Ganga, the river of the gods, who worshipped her[Uma.]. She[Ganga.] was prosperous with a great deal of intelligence. She was sweet in her smiles and knew about the dharma of women. She spoke to the goddess who was the
auspicious and sacred daughter of the king of the mountains, the one who destroys all sins. She[Ganga.] was intelligent
and full of humility. She was accomplished in all kinds of knowledge. Possessing great intelligence, Ganga smiled
and spoke these words. 'O goddess! O one who is devoted to dharma! We are blessed that you have shown us your
favours. O unblemished one! You are revered by the entire universe, but you have shown honour to a river. If a
powerful person asks another person, there is no doubt that the questioner should be respected. There is no doubt
that a person who is evil-souled will not go to a learned person. A person who knows about jnana and vijnana and
is accomplished in commentaries and arguments, but who does not ask others before replying, is not worthy of respect, even if he speaks extremely learned words in an assembly. If he is driven by a sense of ego, he ends up uttering words that are weak in import. You are foremost in heaven in your divine knowledge. The divine and the sacred are always present in you. O  goddess!  In  instructions about the dharma of  women, you  are the one who
should be worshipped by us.' The goddess was thus praised by Ganga because of her many qualities. The extremely beautiful one among the gods[Uma.] then began to speak everything about the dharma of women. 'In accordance
with the ordinances, the dharma of women manifests itself to me. I will thus speak about what is praiseworthy. In a
marriage, the relatives speak about the dharma that women should follow. In the presence of a fire, she agrees to
follow the dharma of her husband. She must be pleasant in nature and sweet in speech. She must be good in conduct and must be pleasant in her appearance. With an attentive mind and a pleasant face, she must follow the dharma of her husband. This is the supreme dharma for a woman who wishes to have a share in dharma. A virtuous
wife always regards her husband as a divinity. In her conduct, she attends to him and follows his words, as if a god
has spoken it. She does not exhibit any sentiments of disregarding this and is excellent in her vows. She derives as
much happiness from looking at her husband as from looking at her son's face. She is virtuous and controlled in
her conduct. Such a wife follows dharma. It has been heard that the dharma of a couple is to follow the sacred
dharma together. A wife whose intelligence is devoted to her husband and who bears a pleasant visage is one who
follows that dharma. She does not speak harsh words, or does not glance at him with cruelty in her eyes. A woman
who exhibits an extremely pleasant face towards her husband is one who is devoted to her husband. Such a beautiful woman does not look at the moon or the sun, or at a tree that has an appellation of being male. If she looks at
none other than her husband, she is one who follows dharma. A woman who attends to her husband like a son,
even if he is poor, diseased, distressed, or weak from travels, is one who obtains a share in dharma. If a woman is
accomplished and self-controlled, if she has sons, if she is devoted to her husband and if she loves her husband,
then that woman has a share in dharma. If a woman always serves and tends, without any distraction, if she is extremely happy and humble, then she obtains a share in the dharma. If a woman does not desire any objects of pleasure, prosperity or happiness other than her husband, then she has a share in that dharma. She always awakes at the
right time and attends to the seniors. She keeps the house clean and rubs it down with cow dung. She always tends
to the fire and makes offerings of flowers. With her husband, she satisfies gods, guests and servants. Following the
law and the ordinances, she subsists on leftover food. A woman who always satisfies and nourishes people is united with dharma. Possessing the qualities, she satisfies the father-in-law and the mother-in-law, attentive at their
feet. She is always devoted to her mother and her father and possesses a store of austerities. A woman who nourishes brahmanas, the weak, those without protectors, the distressed, the blind and the destitute with food is one
who takes part in the vows of her husband. With a light spirit, she always practises vows that are extremely difficult to observe. Her mind is on her husband. She is engaged in the welfare of her husband. She is one who has a
share in the vows of her husband. A woman who regards her husband as supreme, practises auspicious austerities,
which convey her to eternal heaven. She is sacred and follows her husband's vows. For women, the husband is the
god. The husband is the friend. The husband is the destination. There is no objective equal to the husband. There is
no divinity equal to the husband. There is no heaven that can match a woman as much as a husband's favours. O
Maheshvara! If you are pleased with me, that is beneficial heaven for me. Even if a poor or diseased husband asks
the wife to undertake a task that is adharma or leads to a loss in life, even if that task is a vice or leads to a curse
imposed by brahmanas, regarding this as the dharma to be followed in a time of catastrophe, that task must be undertaken, without any reflection. In accordance with your words, I have thus recounted the dharma of women. A
beautiful woman who conducts herself in this way obtains a share in dharma.' Thus addressed, the lord of the gods
worshipped the daughter of the mountain. He then gave all the people permission to leave, including his supreme
companions. The large numbers of bhutas and the rivers went away, to wherever they had come from. The gandharvas and the apsaras also bowed their heads down before Bhava."'
