Yajnavalkya said, 'O lord of men! You asked me about the supreme, established in the unmanifest. This
question is about a great secret. O king! Listen attentively. O lord of Mithila! Having conducted myself in
accordance with the precepts of the rishis, I obtained the yajus from Aditya[We have deliberately retained this as yajus, meaning sacrificial formulae. The mantras were compiled into the
Yajur Veda Samhita. There are two versions of the Yajur Veda Samhita, Shukla and Krishna. Yajnavalkya compiled the Shukla Yajur Veda.]. I gratified the god of heat through
great austerities. O unblemished one! Pleased with me, the lord Surya said, "O brahmana rishi! Ask for the boon
you desire, even if it is very difficult to obtain. I am pleased and will give it to you. It is extremely difficult to obtain my favours." I bowed my head down before that supreme of heat-givers and said, "I do not know the yajus. I
wish to know them quickly." The illustrious one replied, "O brahmana! I will give it to you. Sarasvati, speech personified, will enter your body." The illustrious one then asked me to open my mouth. When I opened my mouth,
Sarasvati entered through the mouth. O unblemished one! When she entered, I began to burn and plunged into the
water. Not understanding what the great-souled Bhaskara[Bhaskara, Ravi and Vibhavasu are also names for the sun god.] intended, I became angry. However, while I was burning, the illustrious Ravi told me, "Tolerate this burning for an instant. You will be cooled down." When he saw that
I had cooled down, the illustrious Bhaskara said, "O brahmana! All the Vedas and Vedanta will be established in
you. O bull among brahmanas! You will compile all the Shatapathas[The Shatapatha Brahmana is associated with the Shukla Yajur Veda.]. When that has been done, your intelligence
will turn towards the question of rebirth. You will obtain the objective desired by those who practise sankhya and
yoga." Having said this, the illustrious one disappeared. On hearing these words and on seeing that the god Vib-
havasu had departed, I happily returned home and thought of Sarasvati. The auspicious goddess Sarasvati instantly
appeared. She was adorned with the vowels and the consonants and she gave me the syllable "Om". As is prescribed, I offered Sarasvati an arghya and another to the best of heat-givers[The sun god.], the refuge of the distressed. To my
great delight, all the Shatapathas, with their mysteries, compilations and appendices, appeared before me. I taught
them to one hundred supreme disciples and caused displeasure to my maternal uncle and his disciples[Vaishampayana was Vyasadeva's disciple and used to teach the Krishna Yajur Veda. He was also Yajnavalkya's
maternal uncle and teacher. There is a story of a dispute between Vaishampayana and Yajnavalkya. When Yajnavalkya subsequently began to teach the Shukla Yajur Veda, Vaishampayana was understandably unhappy.]. O great
king! With my disciples, like the sun with its rays, I was engaged in performing a sacrifice for your great-souled
father. There was a dispute about who should get the dakshina. In Devala's presence, I took half of the dakshina
and gave the other half to my maternal uncle. Sumantu, Paila, Jaimini, your father and the other sages agreed to
this. O unblemished one! I thus obtained fifty yajus. I then studied the Puranas from Lomaharshana[Lomaharshana (alternatively Romaharshana) was Vedavyasa's disciple and Vedavyasa taught him the Puranas.].

'"'O lord of men! Placing the original mantra[The text uses the word bija (seed), which is not quite 'original'. Bija is the mystical syllable that exists in any
mantra.] and the goddess Sarasvati at the forefront, and with the resolution obtained from Surya, I comprehended and compiled the Shatapatha, not done by anyone earlier. I thus accomplished the path I wished to follow. I instructed that entire and complete compilation to my disciples. All those disciples were purified and became supremely delighted. The knowledge instructed by Bhaskara had fifty branches[The word shakha means branch, but is usually applied to reascension. Two shakhas of the Shukla Yajur Veda are
known now.]
and I established it. As I desired, I then began to think about knowledge. O king! The gandharva Vishvavasu was
accomplished in the knowledge of Vedanta. While I was contemplating, he came there and asked me, "What is the
immortal brahman? What is supreme knowledge?" O lord of the earth! He thus asked me twenty-four questions
about knowledge. He then asked me a twenty-fifth question about metaphysics. What is the universe? What is the
negation of the universe? What is Ashva and what is the negation of Ashva[Ashva usually (not always) means horse, or something related to a horse. The answer that follows suggests that
there might be a typo here. Perhaps it should read asva, meaning, without properties.]? What is Mitra? What is Varuna?
What is knowledge? What is the object of knowledge? Who is ignorant? Who is not ignorant? Who possesses
heat? Who is without heat? Who devours Surya? Who is Surya? What is knowledge? What is ignorance? O king!
What exists? What does not exist? What is mobile? What is immobile? What has no beginning? What is without
destruction? What can be destroyed? O  king! These were the excellent questions that the supreme king of  the
gandharvas asked me. One after another, he asked me these questions, which were full of meaning. I told him to
wait for an instant, while I thought about it. When I had restrained him in this way, the gandharva was silent and
remained there. In my mind, I thought again about the goddess Sarasvati and the answers to the questions arose,
like clarified butter from curds. O lord of the earth! O son! I churned the Upanishads and their annexures in my
mind and saw the supreme objective of metaphysics. O tiger among kings! This is the fourth kind of knowledge,
concerning the next world[Fourth because it is about moksha, not about dharma, artha and kama.]. I have already spoken to you about this, which is based on the twenty-fifth. O king! I
spoke about it to King Vishvavasu then. I told him, "O illustrious one! I have heard the questions that you asked
me. O gandharva! You asked me, 'What is the universe and what is the negation of the universe?' Know that the
supreme and unmanifest one[Prakriti.] is the universe. She has the terrible aspects of creation and destruction. She possesses the three qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas.] and invests everything with these. The one without these is said to be the negation of
the universe[Purusha.]. In that way, Ashva and the negation of Ashva are said to be the couple[If this is asva, without qualities, asva will mean purusha and the negation of asva will be prakriti.]. The unmanifest is said to
be prakriti and the one without qualities is purusha. Mitra is purusha and Varuna is prakriti. Knowledge is said to
be prakriti and the object of knowledge is purusha. The ignorant and the not ignorant are said to be purusha, since
both are without qualities. The one with heat is prakriti and the one without heat is said to be purusha. In that way,
ignorance is the unmanifest one[Prakriti.] and knowledge is said to be purusha. You asked me about the mobile and the
immobile. Listen to me. Prakriti is said to be mobile. It undertakes transformations and is the reason behind creation and destruction. The immobile one, who has lordship, but does not undertake transformations for creation
and destruction, is said to be purusha. Those who have determined the nature of adhyatma speak of both of them as
without beginning, without sentiments, without offspring, without destruction, without decay, without creation and
eternal[There seems to be an inconsistency with what has been said about prakriti earlier. That's probably because there
were different schools and types of belief.]. Though it[Prakriti.] leads to creation, it is said to be without decay, without beginning and without change. Purusha is said to be without destruction. There is no decay in it. The learned say that the qualities created by prakriti
are destructible, but not she herself. This is the fourth knowledge of metaphysics, that concerning the next world.
O Vishvavasu! It has been said that one's duty is to obtain riches through knowledge and always perform the ordained tasks, studying all the Vedas attentively. O supreme among gandharvas! This[The brahman.] is not dislodged. Everything
is born from it and merges into it after death. Those who do not understand this purport of the Vedas know nothing.
Even if they study the five Vedas[The epics and the Puranas are known as the fifth Veda.], with the Vedangas and the subsequent branches, they do not understand the
knowledge of the Vedas. The Vedas are like a burden to such a person. O supreme among gandharvas! This is like
a person who desires clarified butter by churning the milk of a she-ass. He only sees the excrement there. There is
no cream from the milk, nor any clarified butter. In that way, despite studying the Vedas, one does not obtain the
knowledge in the Vedas. Such a person is said to be foolish in his intelligence and only bears a burden. In one's atman, one must always single-mindedly think about the supreme objective, so that one does not have to repeatedly
go through birth and death. One must abandon what is indestructible in this world and resort to the dharma of the
indestructible. O Kashyapa[The gandharvas were also descended from the sage Kashyapa.]! Day and night, if one only contemplates the absolute, then one sees oneself as devoid of qualities, united with the absolute. Those virtuous ones see the two as one[The paramatman and the jivatman.]. They get to know the undecaying nature of the twenty-fifth. Desiring the supreme, those practitioners of sankhya are beyond birth, death, fear
and enterprise."

'"Vishvavasu replied, 'O supreme among brahmanas! O illustrious one! You have spoken about the twenty-fifth.
But this is not easy to comprehend and you should explain it. I have heard about this earlier from Jaigishavya,
Asita, Devala, the brahmana rishi Parashara, the intelligent Varshaganya, Bhikshu, Panchashikha, Kapila, Shuka,
Goutama, Arshtishena, the great-souled Garga, Narada, Asuri,  the intelligent Pulastya, Sanatkumara, the great-
souled Shukra and my father, Kashyapa. Later, I heard about this from Rudra and the intelligent Vishvarupa, and
also the gods, the ancestors and the daityas. I have obtained the knowledge that they always speak about. O brahmana! However, using my intelligence, I wish to hear about this from you. O illustrious one! You are foremost
among those who know the sacred texts. You are eloquent and extremely intelligent. There is nothing that is not
known to you. O brahmana! In the world of the gods and in the world of the ancestors, you are said to be an ocean
of learning. The great rishis who dwell in Brahma's abode say that Aditya, the eternal lord of all those who give
heat, taught you about this. O brahmana! O Yajnavalkya! You have obtained the entire knowledge of sankhya and
in particular, the knowledge of yoga. There is no doubt that you are learned and know about the mobile and the immobile. I wish to hear about that knowledge, which is like clarified butter inside cream.'

'"Yajnvalkya said, 'O supreme among gandharvas! I think that you are capable of bearing all of it. O king! You
have asked me. Listen to what I have learned. Prakriti cannot be comprehended, but can be realized by the twenty-
fifth[The twenty-fifth is the jivatman.]. O gandharva! But the twenty-fifth cannot be comprehended by prakriti. Because it cannot be realized in
this way, those who know the truth about sankhya and yoga and about the instructions of the sacred texts refer to it
as Pradhana[The chief or foremost one.]. But though it cannot be seen, it can see itself. It can see the twenty-fourth, the twenty-fifth and the
twenty-sixth[The twenty-fourth is prakriti, the twenty-fifth is the jivatman and the twenty-sixth is the paramatman. In a state
of knowledge, the jivatman can comprehend the paramatman.]. Even when it does not see[In a state of ignorance.], it is capable of seeing. The twenty-fifth thinks that there is nothing
superior to itself. The twenty-fourth is incapable of being grasped by those who do not possess the sight of knowledge. The fish dwells in water. But though they are together, they are distinct. Like the fish, those who are learned
know that it is different[Prakriti is different from the jivatman.]. There is always consciousness from the attachment that results from dwelling together.
However, those who do not understand the unity[Between the jivatman and the paramatman.] are submerged in time. Enveloped by a sense of ego, they are
submerged in time. A person who thinks that he is no different from the other one is a true brahmana. He becomes
one with the absolute and sees the twenty-sixth. O king! The other one and the twenty-fifth are perceived to be different. But those who see them as one are virtuous. They do  not find  delight in the indestructible twenty-fifth
alone. O Kashyapa! Those practitioners of sankhya and yoga are terrified because of their fear of birth and death.
They are devoted to purity and see the twenty-sixth. They are learned in every way and do not enjoy rebirth. O unblemished one! I have thus told you about what is to be known. Following the indications of the sacred texts, I
have told you about true knowledge. O Kashyapa! I have told you about what is seen and what is not seen, about
seeing what is indestructible, about what is absolute and what is not absolute and about what is superior to the
twenty-fifth.'

'"Vishvavasu replied, 'O lord! You have spoken auspicious words to me and told me properly about what is indestructible and is the origin of divinity. May you always be fortunate and without decay. I bow down before you.
May you always be vested with intelligence.'

'"Yajnavalkya said[Yajnavalkya is now speaking to Janaka.], 'Having said this, he left for heaven, radiant in his handsome appearance. Having been
satisfied, the great-souled one circumambulated me first and I was exceedingly pleased with him. O Indra among
men! He passed on the knowledge that he obtained from me to those who live in Brahma's world and those who
dwell in the sky and on earth and they appropriately chose the path that leads to the indestructible. Those who follow sankhya are devoted to the dharma of sankhya. Those who follow yoga are devoted to the dharma of yoga.
There are other men who desire emancipation. To all those who desire insight, this brings knowledge. Among men,
emancipation results from knowledge. O Indra among men! It is said that it cannot be obtained through ignorance.
Therefore, one must search for the truth about knowledge, so that one can free oneself from birth and death. With
faith and devotion, one must always obtain knowledge from a brahmana, a kshatriya, a vaishya or even a shudra
who is of low birth. A person who has faith is not assailed by birth and death. Since they are born from Brahma, all
the varnas are brahmanas. All of them always speak about Brahma. I have spoken to you the truth about the sacred
texts and about knowledge of Brahma. The entire universe is completely pervaded by Brahma. Brahmanas were
generated from Brahma's  mouth. Kshatriyas  were  generated  from  his  arms.  Vaishyas  were  generated  from  his
navel and shudras from his feet. All the varnas should not be thought of in any other way. O king! It is because of
ignorance that one suffers from birth and deeds and the pangs of existence. Devoid of knowledge, all the varnas
fall down in this way. They are immersed in terrible ignorance and enveloped in prakriti's net of birth. Therefore,
one must seek every means to stick to the path of knowledge. I have spoken to you about this. A person who is established in the supreme brahman is always said to obtain emancipation and is an Indra among brahmanas. I have
instructed you about what you had asked me. I have told you the truth. Be bereft of grief. O king! Cross over to the
other side. You have spoken properly. May you always be fortunate.'"

'Bhishma said, "Having been thus instructed by the intelligent Yajnavalkya, the king, the lord of Mithila, was
delighted. He circumambulated the supreme of sages and departed. Daivarati, the lord of men, obtained knowledge
about emancipation. He seated himself and touching one crore cattle, gold and an accumulation of jewels, gave
them away to brahmanas. He instated his son in the kingdom of Videha. The lord of Mithila then resorted to the
dharma of mendicants. He studied the entire knowledge of sankhya and the sacred texts of yoga. O Indra among
kings! He abandoned the ordinary practices of dharma and adharma. He always thought of himself as the infinite
and the absolute. O Indra among kings! O lord of men! He no longer thought of ordinary things like birth and
death, but always devoted himself to tasks associated with the unmanifest brahman. The practitioners of yoga and
sankhya, accomplished about the indications of their own sacred texts, see that the brahman is supreme and is superior to good and evil. Those learned ones always speak of it as pure. You should also become pure. O  best
among men! The giver, the receiver, what is intended as a gift, what is given, what is received, what is instructed to
be given, what is instructed to be received-all these are aspects of the unmanifest. The atman is the only thing
that belongs to the atman and there is nothing that is superior to this. Always regard it in this way and do not think
otherwise. A person who does not know the unmanifest, with qualities and without qualities[Prakriti and purusha respectively.], always goes to
places of pilgrimage and performs sacrifices. He is ignorant. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! One cannot realize
the state of the unmanifest through studying, austerities or sacrifices. The unmanifest must be comprehended. It is
the same with the state of Mahat and consciousness. One must obtain the state that is superior to that of consciousness. Those who are devoted to the sacred texts always know about the supreme and the unmanifest. They are disassociated from birth and death and are disassociated from the qualities. O king! In ancient times, I obtained this
knowledge from Janaka and he from Yajnavalkya. This special knowledge is superior to sacrifices. It is through
knowledge that one can traverse what is difficult to cross, not through sacrifices. O king! Those who are learned
say that birth, death and hardships are difficult to traverse through sacrifices, austerities, rituals and vows. Even if
one obtains heaven, one falls down on the ground. You should worship the supreme, great and pure one, auspicious, without blemish and sacred, the path to emancipation. O king! As the kshetrajna, perform the sacrifice of
knowledge. That is the truth that the rishi spoke about. It has been spoken about in the Upanishads and in ancient
times, Yajnavalkya told King Janaka about this. It is the eternal and the undecaying and he enumerated the auspicious and the immortal. He[Janaka.] then obtained the one who is beyond sorrow."'
