'Sanjaya said, "Having heard Karna's words, Keshava, the destroyer of enemy warriors, smiled. He then laughed
and spoke these words. 'O Karna! Are you not tempted by the offer of a kingdom? Do you not desire to rule the
earth that I will give to you? The victory of the Pandavas is certain. There is no scope for any doubt on that score.
The triumphal banner of the Pandavas can be seen, with the terrible king of the apes perched at the top. It was constructed by Bhouvana with divine maya. It has been raised, as radiant as Indra's banner. Many terrible and divine
beings can be seen on it, evoking fear. It is not obstructed by mountains and forests. It has been raised up diagonally and is one yojana tall. O Karna! Dhananjaya's radiant flag has been raised and is equal to the fire in its form.
When you see the one with the white horses in battle, with Krishna as the charioteer, using the weapons of Indra,
Agni and the Maruts and hear the roar of Gandiva, as forceful as thunder, there will no longer be treta, krita or dva-
para. When you see Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, in battle, protecting his great army with incantations and oblations,
as unassailable as Aditya and tormenting the soldiers of the enemy, there will no longer be treta, krita or dvapara.
When you see the immensely strong Bhimasena in the field of battle, dancing in the battle and drinking
Duhshasana's blood, like a rutting elephant that has slain a challenging tusker, there will no longer be treta, krita or
dvapara. When you see Madri's maharatha sons in battle, routing the army of Dhritarashtra's son like two elephants, shattering the chariots of enemy warriors and engaged in hurling weapons, there will no longer be treta,
krita or dvapara. When you see Drona, Shantanu's son and Kripa in battle, with King Suyodhana and Jayadratha of
Sindhu fiercely dashing to attack and restrained by Savyasachi, there will no longer be treta, krita or dvapara. O
Karna! Depart from here and tell Drona, Shantanu's son and Kripa this. This is a pleasant month, with food and
fuel easily obtained. The herbs and forests are ripe and prosperous now. The trees are full of fruit and with few
flies. There is no mud. The water is tasty. It is not warm, nor is it cold. The time is pleasant. It will be the new
moon[Amavasya.] seven days from now. Let the fight begin on that day, because that is said to be Shakra's day. Also tell all
the kings who have assembled to do battle. "I will accomplish everything that you wish for." The kings and the
princes who are following Duryodhana will be killed through weapons and attain the supreme goal.'"'
