Vasishtha said, 'O supreme among kings! I have spoken to you about the philosophy of sankhya. Now listen
to me as I describe knowledge and ignorance to you progressively. The manifest, which is subject to the
rule of creation and destruction, is said to be ignorance. The twenty-fifth, freed from creation and destruction, is
knowledge. Listen to what has, in due course, been described as knowledge. O son! Rishis who have the sight of
sankhya have laid this down. Among the senses and the organs of action, the senses are said to represent knowledge. Among the senses, we have heard that intelligence is superior. The learned ones have said that the mind is
superior to the senses and represents knowledge. Compared to the mind, the five elements are said to represent
knowledge. There is no doubt that consciousness is superior to the five elements. O lord of men! Compared to consciousness, understanding represents knowledge. Compared to understanding, the unmanifest Prakriti, expressive
of the truth about the supreme lord, is superior. O best among men! Among the different kinds of knowledge that
are to be known, the ordinances are said to be the supreme. The unmanifest and twenty-fifth is said to be the
supreme form of knowledge. O king! Among everything that can be known, this is said to be the supreme kind of
knowledge. The twenty-fifth is the object of knowledge and knowledge about this is said to be unmanifest. A person who knows about the twenty-fifth knows about what is unmanifest. I have told you the difference between
knowledge and ignorance. I will now tell you what has been said about the destructible and the indestructible. Listen. Both[The jivatman and Prakriti.] have been said to be destructible and perishable. I will tell you truthfully the reasons that have been
cited in support of this. There is the view that both are imperishable and both are without a beginning and without
an end. Those who have thought about knowledge have said that both are truly nothing but principles. Though it
leads to the principles of creation and destruction, the unmanifest[Prakriti.] is said to be indestructible. It is through its
qualities that it repeatedly creates. Mahat and the other qualities are respectively generated. It is said to be the truth
that the twenty-fifth presides over the field. The unmanifest that is the twenty-fifth withdraws the net of qualities
and the qualities merge into it. The qualities merge into its quality and the single one that remains is Prakriti. O
son! Kshetrajna then merges into kshetra[Purusha into Prakriti.]. Prakriti, characterized by its qualities, then goes towards destruction.
O king of Videha! With the qualities withdrawn, it no longer possesses any qualities. In  this way,  kshetrajna's
knowledge of kshetra is also destroyed. We have heard that Prakriti is then devoid of qualities. The one with qualities  then  becomes  destructible.  He[Purusha.]  realizes  that  just  like  himself,  Prakriti  is  devoid  of  qualities.  Discarding
Prakriti, he then becomes pure. The intelligent one realizes himself to be distinct[Distinct from Prakriti. Succeeding shlokas suggest that this is a description of a yogi in meditation.]. O Indra among kings! When
he gives up that combination, he exists separately and Prakriti is also seen to be distinct from that combination.
When he no longer desires Prakriti and that net of qualities, he can behold the supreme.

'"'Having seen the supreme, he is free from all anxiety. "What have I done? I have been like a person overtaken
by destiny. Because of my ignorance, I have been like a fish entangled in a net. Because of my delusion, I have
moved from one body to another body. My conduct has been like that of an ignorant fish, moving from one body
of water to another body of water and thinking in its ignorance that the water is everything. In that fashion, because of my ignorance, I have not known my own atman. Shame on my ignorance that I have been repeatedly submerged thus. Because of my confusion, I have followed the course from one body to another body. This[The brahman.] is alone
my friend and my emancipation is with it. I am capable of being united with it. I am just as it is. I see myself as
equal to it. I am like it. It is without blemish. It is evident that I am just like it. I have been ignorant and deluded.
Because of ignorance and delusion, I have been properly entangled. Though without attachments, I have spent a
long period of time being attached. For a long period of time, I have been controlled by others, but did not realize
it. There are different kinds of states-high, medium and low[Referring to states of birth-high being gods, medium being humans and low being inferior species.]. How can I be like that? How can I dwell with
her[Prakriti.] as an equal? Because of my ignorance, I went to her earlier. I will still myself now. I will not dwell with her
and be deceived for a long period of time. I am without transformations. However, I have been deceived by the one
who possesses transformations[Prakriti.]. That is not her crime. It is my crime. It is because of my sentiments that I became  attached  and  withdrew  from  what  had  presented  itself[The brahman.].  That  is  the  reason  I  assumed  many  forms  and
moved from one body to another body. Despite being one without a body, I have assumed the form of a body and
have been assailed, because of that sense of ownership. Prakriti has accordingly conveyed me into those wombs. I
am without a form. Thanks to the sense of ownership, what acts have I performed in those forms? She is in those
wombs and destroys sense and consciousness. I do not possess any sense of ownership. But goaded by ego, I have
performed acts. She divided my atman into many parts and repeatedly engaged me. However, now. I have no sense
of ownership and no ego. I have acted so as to discard the sense of ownership and have always removed a sense of
ego from myself. Having escaped from all that, I have resorted to what is beneficial. I will go to that tranquility
and not unite with what is without consciousness. That kind of union is beneficial. I have no similarity with her."

He thus realizes the supreme relationship with the twenty-fifth. He abandons what is destructible and not beneficial
and is conveyed to the indestructible. This is unmanifest. But because of the nature of becoming manifest, one
without qualities is vested with qualities. O one from Mithila! Having seen the original one who is without qualities, he becomes like it. I have spoken to you about the indications of what is indestructible and destructible, according to the knowledge that I have obtained and according to what the sacred texts have instructed. I will now
again tell you about what I have heard. This is knowledge that is sparkling, without any doubt, and subtle. I have
told you what the sacred texts of sankhya and yoga instruct. This has been stated in the sacred texts of sankhya and
the philosophy of yoga. O lord of the forests! The knowledge of sankhya can awake people and for the welfare of
disciples, this has been clearly enunciated. Accomplished people say that those sacred texts are extensive. The yogis also accept these sacred texts. O lord of men! Those who follow sankhya do not see the truth about a supreme
twenty-fifth. What they regard as supreme has already been described[Sankhya philosophy does not believe in a personal god and this simply states that.]. Those who cite indications from yoga
talk about the truth of awakening, knowledge, that which is to be known and the one who knows[The one who knows is the jivatman and the one who is to be known is the paramatman or brahman. Yoga talks
of both.].'"'