Parashara said, 'No one does a favour to another. No one gives anything to another. In every way, all creatures only act for their own selves. When there is a lack of affection, one's own uterine brothers are proudly
discarded. What should one say about unrelated people? Giving gifts to superior people and receiving gifts from
superior people are equal. But among these, the gift given to a brahmana is more sacred. With the objectives of
dharma and artha in mind, each of the varnas must endeavour to protect riches earned through fair means, and increase them. For the sake of dharma and artha, one should not undertake tasks that seek to obtain wealth through
injurious means. One must remember the virtuous and perform all tasks according to one's capacity. According to
one's capacity, if one gives cool water or that heated through a fire to a guest, one obtains fruits that are like those
got by giving food to someone hungry. The great-souled Rantideva obtained success in the world. But all he did
was to worship hermits with fruits, leaves and roots. Shaibya, lord of the earth, satisfied Mathara[One of the attendants of the sun god, though this is a term also used for Vyasadeva.] with fruits and
leaves and obtained a supreme region. Through being born, mortal people incur debts to gods, guests, servants, ancestors and their own selves and one must act so as to repay these debts. There is studying for maharshis, sacrifices
and rites for gods, funeral sacrifices and donations for ancestors and honouring for men[These are means of repaying those respective debts.]. Debts to one's own self
are repaid through words[Probably the words of the sacred texts.], eating leftovers and protecting one's own self. If one is interested in following dharma, right from the beginning, one should discharge debts to the various categories of servants. Even if one is devoid of riches, one can make efforts to obtain success. Hermits offered oblations of clarified butter into the fire and
obtained success. Vishvamitra's son went to Richika's son[This is unclear. Richika's son was Jamadagni. Vishvamitra's son was Koushika. So Koushika must have gone to
Jamadagni.]. The mighty-armed one worshipped the gods who
have shares in sacrifices with hymns from the Rig Veda. Through the favours of the god of the gods[Shiva.], Ushanas
became Shukra. Through praising the goddess, he was surrounded by energy and found pleasure in the sky[As the planet Venus.].
Asita-Devala, Narada and Parvata, Kakshivat, Jamadagni's son Rama, Tandya, Anshuman, Vasishtha, Jamadagni,
Vishvamitra, Atri, Bharadvaja, Harishmashru, Kundadhara, Shrutashrava-these maharshis controlled themselves
and praised Vishnu, using hymns from the Rig Veda. Through the favours of that intelligent one, they obtained
success in their austerities. By praising him, even those who are undeserving have become deserving and virtuous.
One should not desire to perform acts that increase one's prosperity in this world. Riches obtained through dharma
are true riches. Shame on those obtained through adharma. Dharma is eternal in this world and must not be abandoned for the sake of riches. A person who has dharma in his soul and makes offerings to the fire is supreme
among the performers of auspicious deeds. O Indra among kings! O lord! All the Vedas are established on the
three fires[Dakshina, garhapatya and ahavaniya.]. If a brahmana possesses the sacred fire, his deeds are never diminished. However, if one does not perform the rites of agnihotra, it is better to give up the sacred fire. O tiger among men! The sacred fire, the mother,
the father who has provided the seed and the preceptor must be served in the proper way. If a man abandons pride
and serves the aged, if he is learned, if he behaves as if he is impotent[Gives up sexual desire.], if he looks upon everything with affection, if he is accomplished and if he is non-violent-even if he does not possess wealth, he is worshipped in this
world as a virtuous and noble person.'"'
