Vyasa said, 'Though you have been born as inferior species, V it is because of that good deed that you have
not been confused. O worm! It is because of that deed that you are not confused and have met me. Now
that you have met me, I can save you through the strength of my austerities. There is no other strength that is
stronger than the strength of austerities. O worm! I know that you have been born as a worm because of your own
wicked deeds. However, if you wish to base yourself on dharma, resort to what is supreme dharma. Because of
their deeds, gods also have to come down to earth, or are born as inferior species. Among men, there are the qualities of dharma, kama and artha. A learned person desires speech, intelligence, hands and feet. What can be worse
for a man than to resort to this evil kind of life[A reference to the man having become a worm.]? As long as one is alive on this earth, a foremost brahmana is one
who worships the moon and the sun and speaks about the auspicious accounts. O worm! You will become that.
You will be freed and will enjoy all those qualities of creatures. I will convey you to that status of being a brahmana, which is what you desire.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Having agreed to this, the worm remained where it was[It was crushed to death by the cart.]. It went through birth in all the
other kinds of species-porcupine, lizard, boar, animal, bird, shvapaka, vaishya and finally, kshatriya. He went and
met the rishi and reported everything to him. He remembered how he had been a worm. He joined his hands in
salutation and touched the feet of the rishi, who was truthful in speech, with his head. The worm said, 'My present
state is unmatched and possesses ten times the qualities I had desired. I was earlier a worm, but have become a
prince now. Extremely strong elephants, with golden harnesses, bear me. Supreme horses from Kamboja are yoked
to my chariot. The vehicles that bear me are yoked to camels and mules. With my relatives and advisers, I eat food
that is mixed with meat. I happily sleep on beds in excellent houses. O immensely fortunate one! While I sleep in
the second half of the night, I am extremely honoured. In the second half of the night, all the bards, raconteurs and
minstrels chant my praises and speak pleasantly to me, as if I am the great Indra of the gods. O one who is devoted
to the truth! O infinitely energetic one! All this is because of your favours. I used to be a worm, but have now become a prince. O immensely wise one! I bow down before you. Instruct me about what I should do. In truth, everything that has happened to me has occurred because of the strength of your austerities.' Vyasa replied, 'O king! As
you chose, you have now worshipped me with eloquent words. Even when you were a worm, you retained your
memory  and  that  has  now  come  back.  The  wicked  deeds  that  you  committed  earlier  have  not  yet  been  extinguished. You were a shudra who primarily desired riches. You were cruel and an assassin. You performed a good
deed in earlier times and that is the reason you have met me now. Though you were born as inferior species, you
worshipped me. O prince! Because of that, you will obtain the status of becoming a brahmana. In the field of battle, you will give up your life for the sake of cows and brahmanas. Enjoy the happiness of being a prince. Perform
sacrifices and give away dakshina. Immersed with the brahman, enjoy eternal happiness in heaven. Those born as
inferior species become shudras. Shudras become vaishyas and vaishyas become kshatriyas. A kshatriya who discharges his conduct proudly becomes a brahmana. A brahmana who is virtuous in his conduct goes to the sacred
heaven.'"'
