Vaishampayana said, 'When all the kings gave up attempting to string the bow, the great-souled Jishnu arose from
among the Brahmanas. On seeing Partha advance, with a complexion resplendent like that of Indra's flag, the chief
Brahmanas shook their deerskins and created a loud uproar. Some of them were pleased. Others were displeased.
Others among them, who lived by their wisdom and were wise, told each other, "O Brahmanas! If Kshatriyas like
Karna and Shalya, who are famous in the world, have great strength and are well versed in Dhanur Veda[The science of archery. In general, the knowledge of arms.], could
not string the bow, how can this weakling Brahmana, with no knowledge of weapons, succeed? If he fails to succeed in an act that he has undertaken because of his juvenile inexperience, the Brahmanas will become objects of
ridicule in the eyes of the kings. Therefore, stop him from attempting to string the bow. He is doing it out of vanity
and childishness, inexperienced at being a Brahmana. We will not be ridiculed, not incur anyone's disrespect. Nor
will we displease the kings of this world." Others said, "He is handsome and youthful. He is like the trunk of the
king of elephants. His shoulders, arms and thighs are built well. In perseverance, he looks like the Himalayas. One
who is so resolute may well accomplish the task. Without a doubt, he has great strength and great endeavour. Without these, he would not have gone on his own. Besides, among the three orders[Varnas; the Shudras are not mentioned here.], there is no task in the worlds
that Brahmanas cannot accomplish. Brahmanas abstain from food, live on air, eat only fruits, observe rigid vows
and become weak, yet retain the strength of their own energy. A Brahmana should not be looked down upon,
whether his deeds are right or wrong. No one should consider him incapable of performing a deed, big or small,
pleasing or unpleasant." The Brahmanas continued to voice their opinions in this way.

'Arjuna came to where the bow was and stood there like a stationary mountain. Circumambulating the bow in
accordance with the rites, the scorcher of enemies bowed his head to the bow and joyously grasped it. In the twinkling of an eye, he strung the bow and grasped the five arrows. Through the hole in the machine, he suddenly
pierced the target and it fell down on the ground. Thereupon, a great roar was heard in the sky and a great clamour
arose in the assembly. The gods rained down celestial flowers on Partha's head, that killer of enemies. All the spectators waved their upper garments in joy, or uttered sounds of despair. Flowers showered down from the sky. The
musicians played on hundreds of instruments. In a sweet voice, the bards and the raconteurs began to chant the
praises of the hero. Seeing that destroyer of enemies, Drupada was extremely happy and wished to help Partha
with his army, should the need arise.

'When the uproar reached its peak, Yudhishthira, foremost among those who tread the path of dharma, swiftly
left the assembly and went home, accompanied by the twins, supreme among men. On seeing the target shot and
on seeing Partha, the equal of Shakra[Indra.], Krishna was extremely happy. She went to Kunti's son with a garland of
white flowers. All the Brahmanas paid homage to the one who had accomplished the unthinkable and had won her
in the assembly. He soon left the arena, followed by the one who would be his wife.'
