Vaishampayana said, 'Then King Yudhishthira rushed after Shishupala and spoke to him in these sweet and conciliatory words. "O lord of the earth! The words that you have spoken are not appropriate. O king! They are in violation of dharma, they are cruel and serve no purpose. O lord of the earth! Shantanu's son Bhishma will never err in
supreme dharma and do not insult him in vain. Look at these many lords of the earth, older than you. They accepted the homage shown to Krishna and you should also accept it. O lord of Chedi, Bhishma knows Krishna's true
nature and you yourself do not know it as well as the Kouravya[In this context, meaning Bhishma.] does."

'Bhishma said, "Krishna is the oldest in the worlds. He who does not accept the homage shown to him, deserves
neither kind words, nor conciliation. A kshatriya who is supreme among warriors and having defeated a kshatriya
in battle, sets him free from captivity, becomes his preceptor. In this assembly of kings, I do not see a lord of the
earth who has not been defeated in battle through Satvata's[Satvata is a name for Vishnu, and Krishna.] energy. Not only is Achyuta supremely deserving of
this homage, he deserves to be worshipped by all the three worlds. Many bulls among kshatriyas have been defeated by Krishna in battle. The entire universe and everything are established in Varshneya. Therefore, though there
are elders here, we show homage to Krishna and no one else. You should not speak as you did. Your thoughts
should not be of that kind. O king! I have attended upon many who are old in knowledge. When they recounted in
their assemblies the qualities of Shouri, blessed with all the qualities, I have heard of those many qualities that are
greatly revered by the honest. Many are the times when I have heard people talk about the deeds that this intelligent one has performed since birth. O king of Chedi! We have not worshipped Janardana out of caprice. Nor have
we shown him homage because of our special relationship with him or because we expect anything from him. He
is the source of all happiness on earth, all the honest of the earth honour him. We offered him the homage because
we knew of his fame, valour and victories. There is no one here, however young, who has not been examined.
Passing over many who possess qualities and age, we chose Hari as the most deserving of honour. He is the oldest
among brahmanas in knowledge and among kshatriyas, he is the greatest in strength. Both these are firm grounds
for Govinda to be worshipped. He is learned in the Vedas and Vedangas and has infinite strength. Is there anyone
else in the world of men who is as distinguished as Keshava? In Achyuta can always be found generosity, dexterity, learning, valour, modesty, deeds, supreme intelligence, humility, beauty, steadfastness, satisfaction and prosperity. Therefore, he has every quality. He is the teacher, father and preceptor. He is fit to be honoured and worthy of
worship. Hrishikesha is the officiating priest, the preceptor, the bridegroom[Alternatively, son-in-law, as indicative of someone who deserves to be honoured.], the snataka, the king and the friend.
Therefore, Achyuta has been shown the homage. The worlds owe their origin to Krishna and in him are they dissolved. It is in Krishna that all the beings of this universe are established. He is passive nature, he is the active doer
and he is eternal. He is supreme among all beings and it is for this reason that Achyuta is the eldest. Intelligence,
mind, greatness, wind, energy, water, sky, earth and the four kinds of beings[Those born from wombs and eggs, plants and those born from sweat (insects and worms).]-are all established in Krishna. The
sun, the moon, the stars, the planets, the directions and the intermediate directions-are all established in Krishna.
Since he does not know that Krishna is always everywhere, this Shishupala is only a child[Because he doesn't have the intelligence.] and utters these
words. It is only the intelligent man who can see the best of dharma and can act according to dharma, not this king
of Chedi. Who among these great-souled lords of the earth, young or old, does not consider Krishna to be worthy
of worship? Who does not show him homage? If Shishupala considers that this homage was undeserving, let him
act as he sees fit, for this undeserving honour."'
