Vaishampayana said, 'Having defeated Vaikartana, Partha told Virata's son, "Take me to the army where there is a
golden palm[Bhishma's standard had a golden palm.]. Our grandfather, Shantanu's son Bhishma, is stationed on a chariot there. He looks like an immortal and is stationed there, wishing to fight with me. I will cut down the string of his bow in a battle. You will witness today a colourful and divine weapon unleashed by me. It will streak like lightning in the midst of a storm in
the sky. The Kurus will witness my Gandiva, with a golden back. All the assembled enemies will debate among
themselves, 'Is he shooting with the right hand or the left[Arjuna was ambidextrous.]?' I will make an impassable river flow, with waves of
blood, eddies of chariots and elephants as crocodiles. It will flow towards the next world. This forest of Kurus has
hands, feet, heads, backs and arms as branches. I will cut it down with straight-tufted arrows. The Kourava soldiers
will be vanquished by my bow alone. Like a fire in the forest, I will create a hundred paths. Pierced by me alone,
you will see the soldiers twirling on a wheel. Stand firmly on the chariot, over plain and uneven ground. I will
pierce with my arrows the mountain that rises up into the sky. Earlier, on Indra's instructions, I killed thousands
and hundreds of Poulamas and Kalakhanjas in battle[Described in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. I have obtained my firm grip from Indra and my dexterity
of hand from Brahma. I have learnt from Prajapati deep, terrible and wonderful techniques[Prajapati means the lord of all beings. Since Brahma has been separately mentioned, it is not clear who is
meant here.]. I destroyed Hiranyapura on the other side of the ocean, after vanquishing sixty thousand charioteers who wielded terrible
bows[Described in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. The forest of the Kurus has the banners as the trees, the soldiers as the grass and the chariots as groups of
lions. I will consume it with the energy of my weapons. With my straight-tufted arrows, I will draw them out from
the nests of their chariots, like the wielder of the vajra destroyed the asuras alone. I obtained the Roudra weapon
from Rudra, Varuna[More correctly, Vaaruna.] from Varuna, the Agneya weapon from Agni, Vayavya from Matarishvan[Another name for Vayu.] and the vajra
and other weapons from Shakra. The terrible sons of Dhritarashtra are protected by lions among men. But I will
uproot them. O son of Virata! Remove all your fears." Thus assured by Savyasachi, Virata's son penetrated the intelligent Bhishma's terrible army of chariots.

'The mighty-armed Dhananjaya advanced to conquer his enemies, but the one who was terrible in his deeds[Bhishma.]
countered this fearful advance. Four immensely strong ones advanced towards the one with the terrible bow-
Duhshasana, Vikarna, Duhsaha and Vivimshati. They were skilled and spirited and adorned with colourful garlands and ornaments. They advanced and countered Bibhatsu, the wielder of the terrible bow. Duhshasana pierced
Virata's son Uttara with an arrow. With a second one, the brave one pierced Arjuna on the chest. Jishnu[Arjuna.] circled.
With an arrow that was shafted with the feathers of vultures and had a broad tip, he sliced off his[Duhshasana's.] bow that was
decorated with polished gold. He then pierced him in the breast with five arrows. Oppressed by Partha's arrows, he
fled from the field of battle. With arrows that were sharp, straight and shafted with the feathers of vultures, Dhritarashtra's son Vikarna then pierced Arjuna, the slayer of enemy warriors. But Kounteya immediately pierced him
with straight-tufted arrows on his forehead and thus wounded, he fell down from the chariot. Then, seeking to rescue their brother in battle, Duhsaha, together with Vivimshati, rushed towards Partha and enveloped him with
sharp arrows. But the alert Dhananjaya struck both of them at the same time with sharp arrows that were shafted
with the feathers of vultures and killed their horses. With their horses slain and their limbs pierced, the two sons of
Dhritarashtra were borne away by their followers, who arrived on other chariots. Thus the unvanquished Bibhatsu,
the diademed and immensely strong Kounteya, accomplished in striking the target, covered all the directions.'
