Vyasa said, 'One should not be enamoured of fragrances, food and other objects that bring happiness. Nor
should one accept ornaments. One should not desire for honour, deeds and fame. A brahmana is known
from such conduct. There may be a person who has served[The preceptor.], observed brahmacharya and studied all the Vedas-
the Rig, the Sama and the Yajur. But this does not make him a brahmana. There may be a person who looks upon
all beings as kin, who knows everything and knows all the Vedas. But until lack of desire is generated in him, he
does not become a brahmana, free from birth and death. There may be a person who has performed many kinds of
sacrifices and rites, giving away a lot of dakshina. But until he is compassionate and without greed, he does not obtain the status of a brahmana. When a person does not frighten others and is himself not terrified by others, when
he does not desire anything or hate anything, he attains the brahman. When he does not have wicked sentiments
towards all beings, in deeds, thoughts and speech, he attains the brahman. Other than the single bondage of desire,
there is no other bondage in this world. Someone who is free from the bondage of desire attains the brahman. Just
as the moon is freed from misty clouds, he is freed from desire. Such a patient person is radiant and waits for his
time[Time of death.] with fortitude. He is full, like waters flowing into the ocean. He is in a state that is not dislodged and is not
overwhelmed by desire. He does not wish for any desires. In this body, he obtains the world of heaven. The Upanishads represent the truth of the Vedas. Self-control represents the truth of the Upanishads. Donations represent the
self-control of the Upanishads. Austerities represent the donations of the Upanishads. Renunciation represents the
austerities of the Upanishads. Happiness represents the renunciation of the Upanishads. Heaven represents the happiness of the Upanishads. Tranquility represents the heaven of the Upanishads. If you desire truth and contentment,
their supreme signs are tranquility and the extinguishing of grief, sorrow in the mind, torment and thirst. Lack of
sorrow, lack of ownership, tranquility, cheerfulness, immersion in the atman and lack of desire for riches-these
again are said to be the six signs of completeness. The wise use these six qualities of sattva to become extremely
learned. Those learned ones are established in the atman in this world and are also learned after death. It[The atman.] has not
been created, nor is it destroyed. It is natural and does not require cleansing. A wise person acts well, knows adhyatma and enjoys a happiness that is without decay. He restrains his mind from wandering around in every direction
and fixes it[On the atman.]. Through this, he obtains a satisfaction that is incapable of being obtained through any other means.
Through  this,  one  is  content  without  eating.  Through  this,  one  is  content  without  riches.  Through  this,  one  is
strong, despite lack of attachment. A person who knows this knows the Vedas. Such a person protects his atman
and does not think about the various doors[The gates of the body, a reference to the senses.]. He is only devoted to the atman. Such a person is said to be a virtuous brahmana. Such a person is established, having extinguished his desire. He is controlled in the supreme truth.
He is happy in every way, like the waxing moon. Because of his qualities, such a sage is honoured among beings
as  special. His  happiness dispels sorrow,  like the sun  dispelling darkness. He  transcends tamas. He  transcends
deeds. He transcends any decay in the qualities. He is not attached to material objects. He does not experience
birth and death. He is free in every way and regards everything as equal. While still in his body, he transcends the
senses and the objects of the senses. He obtains the supreme cause and transcends the reason for action[The reason for action is interpreted as prakriti.]. Having
obtained the greatest of the great, there is no return[Rebirth.] for him.'"'
