'"Bharadvaja said, 'If it is the wind that sustains life, if it is the wind that
makes us move, if it makes us breathe and speak, then remaining alive is
futile[Bharadvaja's questions in this chapter are sometimes difficult to translate.
But they lead up to the point that life is more than the five elements.]. If heat is the quality of fire and the fire cooks food, if the fire ensures digestion, then remaining alive is futile. When an animal dies, the
breath of life is not noticed. The wind departs and the heat is destroyed. If
life is equivalent to the wind, if it depended only on the wind, then, it
should have been seen to leave into the circle of air and mingle with the
wind. If life depended on the wind, then, when it is destroyed, it should
have mingled outside, like waters released into the great ocean. If water is
flung into a well, or if a lamp is hurled into the fire, then, both of them are
instantly destroyed[They lose their independent existence.], as soon as they are flung away. How can a living
body be constituted out of the five general elements? If one of them does
not exist, the aggregate of the other four does not exist either. Water is destroyed if there is no food. The wind is destroyed if breathing is restrained.
If one doesn't pass excrement, space doesn't exist. If one doesn't take food,
fire is destroyed. Disease, wounds and other hardships make the earth decay. When these five elements are separated[The text uses the word panchatva. This simply means death, that is, when
the body is separated into the five elements.], where does life go? What
does life know? What does it hear? What does it speak? It is said that a cow
will save me in the next world[The donation of cattle.]. But after having been given away, that animal dies? Whom will that cow save? The receiver of the cow and the giver
are both equal; in this world, they both meet with destruction. Where will
they meet again? If a person has been eaten up by birds, if he has fallen
down from the summit of a mountain, if he has been consumed by the fire,
how will he take life again? If the root of a tree has been severed, it does
not grow again. Other seeds can sprout. How can someone who is dead revive? In earlier times, only seeds were created and everything circulated
from those. Those who die, are destroyed by death. Seeds can only circulate
from seeds.'"'
