Vyasa said, 'There is a colourful tree of desire in the heart. It is generated from the store of confusion. Anger
and insolence constitute its gigantic trunk. The desire for knowledge is the source of its liberation. Ignorance is its root and delusion sprinkles it with water. Jealousy makes up the leaves. Earlier acts provide the fertilizer. Lack of judgement and lack of thought are the branches. Sorrow makes up the terrible smaller branches. The
thirst that seduces are the creepers that surround it from all sides. Those who are extremely greedy, desiring the
fruit, worship that giant tree. They seek those fruits, tied up in bonds of effort. As long as one is tied down by those
bonds, the tree attracts a person. But if a person endeavours, he can go beyond misery and transcend them both[Both misery and joy.].
A person whose wisdom is accomplished and bursts forth burns down the tree, like the poison in a person afflicted
with disease being destroyed. Aversion becomes his foundation and forcibly destroys its foundation[Aversion to attachment is the foundation of yoga and destroys the tree's foundation.]. Distraction
is severed through renunciation and by resorting to supreme tranquility. A person who knows that desire only attracts, can use the knowledge of desire to kill it and go beyond misery. The body is described as a city and intelligence as its lord. For intelligence, which is based in the body, the entity known by the name of the mind is the one
that thinks of the objectives. The senses are the subjects in the city and it is for them that tasks with objectives are
performed. It is there that two terrible taints exist, known as tamas and rajas. With the lords of the city[Mind, intelligence and consciousness.], the citizens remain alive for this. Serving those two taints, the ones without the gates[The body has gates. The ones without gates are mind, intelligence and consciousness.] also serve those objectives. It is
difficult for intelligence to be conquered[By rajas or tamas.]. Nevertheless, its dharma is said to be the same as that of the mind. The
citizens[The senses.] are agitated by the mind and lose their stability. The intelligence strives for objectives that are damaged
and are not successful. But despite not being accomplished, they are separately remembered and torment the mind.
Though the mind alone is important, the intelligence is also separately afflicted. One is then enveloped by emptiness and covered by rajas. The mind meets this rajas and has a friendship with it. It gathers up the citizens of the
city and hands them over to rajas.'"'
