The brahmana said, 'There is one ruler. There is no second ruler. Wherever I am employed, that is where I roam
around. The ruler is the being who is lodged in the heart and he rules from there. I am moved by him, like
water down a slope. There is one preceptor. There is no second one. He is in the heart and I will speak
about him. I am always instructed by that preceptor and all the danavas are defeated because of that. There is one
relative. There is no second one. He is in the heart and I will speak about him. It is because of his instructions that
relatives behave like relatives and the saptarshis blaze in the seven firmaments. There is one person who hears.
There is no second one. He is in the heart and I will speak about him. Having resided with that preceptor in the
preceptor's house, Shakra obtained immortality in all the worlds. There is one enemy. There is no second one.
Having always been instructed by that preceptor, all the serpents hate the worlds. In this connection, an ancient
history is recounted about what Prajapati told the serpents, the gods and the rishis. Seated around Prajapati, the
gods, the rishis, the serpents and the asuras asked, "What is best for us? Tell us." Asked about their welfare, the
illustrious Brahma only uttered the syllable of "Om". Hearing this, they fled in different directions. Having received what was meant to be an instruction to their own selves, they fled. The attribute of an inclination to bite first
emerged among snakes. Asuras developed natural insolence in their conduct. The gods were engaged in giving and
the maharshis in self-control. They received the same instruction and the single refined word. However, all the
snakes, the gods, the rishis and the danavas developed diverse dispositions. One hears what is spoken only when
one receives it in the proper way. This is true even if one asks again. No other preceptor can be thought of[In understanding a preceptor's words, the true preceptor is one's own self.]. An
act is thought of first. It is undertaken subsequently. The preceptor, the one who understands, the enemy and the
one who hates are all lodged inside the heart. By undertaking wicked acts in the world, one becomes an evildoer.
By undertaking good acts in the world, one becomes a doer of good deeds. If a person is addicted to the pleasure
that comes from gratifying the senses, he is driven by desire and his conduct follows desire. A person who follows
vows is always engaged in conquering the senses. There may be a person who abandons all vows and deeds and
bases himself on the brahman alone. Basing himself on the brahman, he roams around in this world and becomes a
brahmachari. The brahman is the kindling. The brahman is the fire. The brahman is the sacrifice. The brahman is
the  water.  The  brahman  is  the  preceptor.  He  is  submerged  in  the  brahman.  This  is  the  subtle  nature  of  brahmacharya, understood by those who are learned. Having understood it and instructed by kshetrajna[Meaning, either their own jivatmans or the paramatman.], they follow
this.'"'
