Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When all the kings were seated, the king of Souvira
heard Kotikashya's words and replied to Shaibya. "On hearing her words, my mind is besotted by her. She is
supreme among women. Why have you returned from there? O mighty-armed one! I tell you truthfully. Now that I
have seen this lady, all other women seem like monkeys to me. She has stolen my heart, from the moment that I
have seen her. O Shaibya! Tell me if that fortunate one is human." Kotikashya said, "She is the famous princess
Droupadi Krishna. She is the revered queen of the five sons of Pandu. That respected one is the beloved of all the
Parthas. O Souvira! Now that you have met her, let us happily proceed towards Souvira." But Jayadratha, the lord
of Souvira and Sindhu, was evil in his inclinations. He replied, "Let us go and see Droupadi." He entered the empty hermitage, like a wolf entering a den of lions.

'He himself was the seventh[This isn't made explicit. Six others could have entered the cottage with Jayadratha, but this doesn't sound
plausible, especially since we don't know who these other six were. It could be that the cottage normally held six
-the five Pandavas and Droupadi. In that sense, Jayadratha was the seventh in the cottage.] and spoke these words to Krishna. "O one with the beautiful thighs! Are you
well? Are your husbands in good health? Are those whose welfare you desire in good health?" Droupadi replied,
"Kouravya King Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, is well. So am I, his brothers, and the others you have asked about. O
son of a king! Accept this seat and water to wash your feet. Let me give you fifty deer for your breakfast. Kunti's
son, Yudhishthira, will himself give you black antelopes, spotted antelopes, deer, fawn, sharabhas[Sharabha has different meanings. In this context, it probably means a young elephant.], rabbits,
white-footed antelopes, ruru, shambara[Kind of deer.], oxen, many deer, boar, buffaloes and many others of the deer species."

Jayadratha said, "You have already done everything to ensure a good breakfast for me. Come. Ascend my chariot
and discover complete happiness. The Parthas are wretched and live in the forest. They have lost their fortune and
have been dislodged from their kingdom. They have lost their intelligence. You should not serve them. It is not
wise to be devoted to husbands who have lost their fortune. One should be united with a husband when he is united
with prosperity, but no longer reside with him when the fortune is destroyed. The sons of Pandu are without fortune. Their kingdom has been destroyed for an eternal period. Out of affection towards them, you should not suffer
that misery. O one with the beautiful hips! Be my wife. Abandon them and obtain happiness. With me, share the
kingdoms of Sindhu and Souvira." At these words of the king of Sindhu, which made the heart tremble, Krishna
left the spot, a deep frown on her face. The slender-waisted Krishna ignored his words in contempt and told the
one from Sindhu, "Do not speak in this way again. Are you not ashamed?" Expecting her husbands to return soon,
the unblemished one began to distract him with words, mingled with more words.'
