'Yudhishthira asked, "How should a king behave towards an enemy who is mild, one who is fierce and one who
has a large army? O grandfather! Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about the conversation
between Brihaspati and Indra. The lord of the gods joined his hands in salutation and spoke to Brihaspati. Vasava,
the destroyer of enemy heroes, approached and asked him, 'O brahmana! How should I be attentive and act towards those who injure me? How can I use techniques to control them, without destroying them? In general, victory is obtained through a clash between armies. But what can I do so that the powerful and blazing Shri does not
abandon me?' The radiant one[Brihaspati.] was accomplished about dharma, artha and kama and knew about the precepts of
rajadharma. He replied to Purandara, 'When seeking to control those who cause injury, one should not use conflict.
That is for those who are intolerant and cannot forgive, it is practised by children. If one desires to kill an enemy,
one should not disclose this. Rage, power and intolerance should be controlled and kept within one's own self.
Even if there is distrust, one must serve the enemy, as if one trusts him. One must always speak pleasantly. One
must never act in an unpleasant way. One should refrain from pointless hostility and abandon any voicing of it. A
fowler wanting to catch birds imitates the tones of the birds. A king wishing to subjugate should act in that way. O
Purandara! One brings the enemies under one's subjugation and then kills them. O Vasava! Having conquered the
enemy, one should never sleep happily. Like a crackling fire, the evil-souled one can arise again. But in general, a
clash is not the recommended task for victory. O lord! Having conquered an enemy by winning his trust, one
should let him be. However, having consulted with his advisers and great-souled and learned ministers, an enemy
may not be defeated in his heart. He may ignore it[The defeat.], or choose to strike back. He may wait for a time to strike,
when one is distracted in one's state. He may use trusted men to corrupt the army[The victor's army.]. He[This is now a reference to the conquering king.] must consider the beginning, the middle and the end and everything that is hidden[Such as an incipient rebellion.]. Obtaining knowledge and proof, one must corrupt the forces[Of the enemy.]. One should use dissension, blandishments and herbs[Probably a reference to poisonous substances.]. However, one should never mix one's
clothes with that of the enemy[As a sign of truce, clothing, especially headdresses, was often exchanged.]. After having waited for a long time, one can then slay the enemy. One should
spend the time in waiting, looking for an opportunity. Large numbers of the enemy should not be immediately
killed. If one waits, the victory will be without anxiety. One should not impale a stake that creates a fresh wound.
When the right time has come for striking, that is when one should attack again. O Indra of the gods! This is what
is indicated for a man who wishes to kill the enemy. However, a man who is waiting for the right time should not
let that moment pass. This is the dharma of time. For one who desires this, it is extremely rare for that moment to
come back again. Those who are virtuous honour the technique of defeating the enemy's energy. Time always
brings success. If something has not been obtained, one should not press. O Purandara! Give up desire, anger and
ego. Engage yourself in detecting the weaknesses of those who seek to injure. O supreme among the gods! O
Shakra! Mildness, chastisement[Excesses of mildness and chastisement.], laziness and carelessness and different kinds of deceit can destroy the success
of those who are not discriminating. These four must be destroyed and deceit countered. Without any hesitation,
one will then be able to strike at the enemy. If this is capable of being secretly undertaken with just one person, this
is what should be done. Many advisers can divulge secrets and falsely pass on the responsibility to each other. If it
is impossible to do this[Have consultations with only one person.], one can then have consultations with others. The four limbs should be used against
those who are seen and brahmadanda against those who are not seen[Against an enemy who can be seen, the four kinds of forces in the army should be employed. In this context,
since the enemy is invisible or far away, brahmadanda can be interpreted as a dependence on destiny. Alternatively, it can be interpreted as resort to rites, sacrifices and mantras.]. Dissension should first be used and silence[Silencing the enemy through conciliation.] and force thereafter. Depending on the right time, the king must employ these. At a time when the enemy
is stronger, one must bow down. However, one must be attentive in seeking for a weakness when he is careless, so
that one can kill him. One must bow down, use gifts and speak pleasant words. One must serve the enemy, so that
he has no grounds for suspicion. One must carefully avoid all the postures that give rise to suspicion. One should
not trust those who have been defeated. Those who have been injured are always awake. O supreme among the
gods! O lord of the immortals! There is no task that is as supremely difficult as ensuring prosperity for those who
have varied means of subsistence. That is the reason he[The king.] is spoken of as the generator of different kinds of conduct. One must be engaged in this, restraining both friends and foes. People disrespect one who is mild and hate
one who is fierce. Do not be mild. Do not be fierce. Be both mild and fierce. A raging torrent overcomes the riverbank and floods everything with water. If one is careless, the embankments of the kingdom break down in that
way. One should not engage against many enemies at the same time. O Purandara! Use sama, dana, bheda and danda. One should use these one at a time. Even if one is skilled, one does not act against all the wicked at the same
time. A king who is intelligent knows he is not capable of countering everyone at the same time. When there is a
large army of horses, elephants and chariots and there are foot soldiers and many implements of war and that sixfold army[One has added machines or implements of war to the standard four divisions. The sixth is either the treasury or
the supplies.] is devoted, when one uses one's intelligence to deduce that one is superior in many ways, then, without any hesitation, one can directly strike against bandits. The sacred texts do not recommend conciliation, but
punishment[In a situation where the enemy is weaker.]. Instead of mildness, one must always advance against the enemy. However, one must avoid the destruction of crops, acts of mixing[Mixing poison in waterbodies.] and excessive destruction of nature. One can use deceit to infuse dissension
among people and allow wicked and reprehensible deeds by trusted men, employed against the cities in the kingdom. The lord of the earth will pursue him[The enemy.] into the city and conquer all the objects of pleasure inside the city. O
destroyer of Bala and Vritra! He must implement the recommended policy for the cities, as is necessary. He will
secretly give them[Presumably the conquered leaders.] riches, while taking away their own possessions. He will cite the sins of those wicked ones
and employ them in the cities and the kingdom. There are others who are learned about the texts of love[The text uses the word ratishastra, texts of love. This is probably a typo and should be atishastra, referring to
those who are extremely learned in the sacred texts.] and are
adorned with the foresight of knowing the ordinances of the sacred texts. There are extremely skilled ones, accomplished in recounting tales. For bringing down the enemy, these should be considered.'

'"Indra asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! What are the signs of wicked people? How does one know evil
ones? I am asking you. Tell me.'

'"Brihaspati replied, 'He dislikes your good qualities and proclaims your bad qualities behind your back. When
others praise you, he is silent and reluctant. Even if there is no obvious reason, one can discern from this silence.
Though he seems trustworthy, he bites his lips and shakes his head. He is gracious in public and ungracious in private. When someone is absent, he acts against him. But when that person is present, he says nothing. He eats alone
and says, "Today, it is not as it should be[A complaint about the food.]." In particular, these signs can be seen in his sitting, sleeping and
walking around. If someone sorrows when you are unhappy, that is the sign of a friend. The opposite of this is the
sign of an enemy. From anything that is contrary, one can determine the characteristics of an enemy. O lord of the
thirty gods! Know from these and the others that I have spoken about, to detect wicked men, since nature is always
superior. O supreme among the gods! I have described the knowledge of evil ones. O lord of the immortals! Know
the truth of what has been stated in the sacred texts.'"

'Bhishma said, "Hearing the words spoken then by Brihaspati, Purandara, engaged in the destruction of the enemy, acted in accordance with this. At the right time, the slayer of enemies became victorious and brought the enemy under his subjugation."'
