'Sanjaya said, "On seeing Drona slaughter the horses, charioteers, rathas and elephants, the Pandavas were distressed and surrounded him. King Yudhishthira spoke to Dhrishtadyumna and Dhananjaya. 'Make endeavours to
counter the one who was born from a pot and surround him[Drona was born from a pot.].' Arjuna and Parshata, with their followers, surrounded him, together with all the maharathas-the Kekayas, Bhimasena, Subhadra's son, Ghatotkacha, Yudhishthira, the twins, Matsya, Drupada's son, Droupadi's cheerful sons, Dhrishtaketu, Satyaki, the enraged Chekitana and maharatha Yuyutsu. O king! There were many other kings who followed the Pandavas. In accordance
with their lineage and their valour, they performed many deeds. On seeing that the army of the Pandavas was thus
protected in battle, Bharadvaja's son glanced at them, with anger in his eyes. He was stationed on his chariot, invincible in battle, and was overcome by terrible rage. He pierced the Pandava army, like the wind scattering
clouds. He attacked the chariots, horses, men and elephants in every direction. Though he was old, Drona roamed
around, like a mad young man. His horses were crimson in colour and were as fleet as the wind. They were covered in blood. O king! Those horses thus assumed a beautiful appearance. On seeing that angry one, rigid in his
vows, descend like death, the Pandava warriors fled in every direction. Some fled in fright. Others returned. Some
glanced at him and an extremely dreadful noise arose, causing delight among brave ones and leading to fright
among those who were cowards. This completely filled the space between the sky and the earth. Yet again, Drona
announced his name in the battle. He shot hundreds of arrows at the enemy and assumed a dreadful form. Though
he was aged, the powerful Drona acted like one who was young. The intelligent one was like death amidst the Pan-
dava soldiers. The fierce one sliced off the heads and the arms with their ornaments. The maharatha rendered the
chariots empty and roared. O lord! Because of his roars of delight and because of the force of his arrows, the warriors trembled in the field of battle, like cattle because of the winter. As a result of the roar of Drona's chariot, the
stretching of his bowstring and the sound of his bow, a great sound arose in the sky. Many thousands of arrows
were released by him. They covered all the directions and descended on the elephants, the horses and the chariots.
His extremely forceful bow was like the fire, with arrows as its flames. The Panchalas and the Pandavas attacked
Drona. But he dispatched the rathas, elephants and horses to Yama's abode. In a short while, Drona covered the
earth with the mud of blood. He showered supreme weapons and arrows in every direction. Drona covered the directions with his net of arrows and nothing could be seen. Foot soldiers, chariots, horses and elephants were
shrouded and his standard could be seen, roaming around, like a cloud tinged with lightning.

'"With the bow and arrows in his hand, Drona used arrows to penetrate the five brave ones from Kekaya and the
king of Panchala and then attacked Yudhishthira's army. Bhimasena, Dhananjaya, Shini's grandson, Drupada's
son, Shibi's son, the lord of Kashi and Shibi were delighted. They roared and covered him with a large number of
arrows. They were assailed by arrows released from Drona's bow. These were colourful and gold-tufted. They
pierced the bodies of elephants and young horses and penetrated the ground, the tufts covered with blood. The
earth was strewn with large numbers of warriors, chariots, elephants and horses, mangled by the arrows. They fell
down on the ground and looked like dark clouds in the sky. Desiring the prosperity of your sons, Drona crushed
the armies of Shinis's descendant, Bhima, Arjuna, Shibi, Abhimanyu, the king of Kashi and many other brave ones
in that battle. O Indra among Kouravas! The great-souled one performed this, and many other deeds, in the battle.
O king! Having scorched the world, like the sun at the time of destruction, Drona went to heaven. On his golden
chariot, the brave one killed hundreds and thousands of Pandava warriors in the battle and was brought down by
Parshata. He killed more than two akshouhinis of brave ones who never retreated. After that, the wise one attained
the supreme objective. O king! The one on the golden chariot performed extremely difficult deeds and was then
killed by the Pandavas and the Panchalas, the performers of inauspicious and cruel deeds. O king! When the preceptor was killed in the battle, there was a roar among the beings in the firmament and also among the soldiers.
This resounded in heaven, the earth, the sky, the directions and the sub-directions. A great sound of 'shame' was
heard among all the beings. The gods, the ancestors and all those who were his relatives saw that Bharadvaja's maharatha son was slain. Having obtained victory, the Pandavas roared like lions. The earth trembled because of that
loud roar."'
