'"Narada said, 'This is the seventh of the nether regions of earth, named Rasatala[However, in most listings of the seven nether regions, Rasatala is in the middle and Patala is at the bottom.]. Surabhi, the mother of all
cows, who was created from amrita, dwells there. She is always overflowing with milk and is the source of all the
essences of earth. That single supreme essence is distilled from the core of the six essences[The word used is rasa, which means juice, taste, flavour, essence. In the context of taste, the six rasas are pungent, sour, sweet, salty, bitter and acidic.]. In ancient times,
this unblemished one arose from the grandfather's[Brahma's.] mouth, when he was satisfied with amrita and regurgitated its
essence. The flow of her milk descended on the surface of the earth and created a lake that is known as the sacred
and extremely supreme ocean of milk. It is surrounded by blossoming foam in every direction. The supreme sages
who drink foam dwell there. O Matali! They are known as the drinkers of foam because they survive on foam.
They are engaged in terrible austerities and the gods are terrified of them. O Matali! From her, a cow was born for
each of the directions. They live there, as those who protect those directions and it is said that they support the directions. Surabhi's calf named Surupa sustains the eastern direction. Varuna's western direction is sustained by
Subhadra. O Matali! She is great in her influence and has the form of the universe. The calf named Sarvakamadugha sustains the northern direction. O Matali! She is devoted to dharma and is named after Ilavila's son[Ilavila, or Idavida, was married to the sage Vishrava and Kubera was their son. The north is Kubera's direction.].
The gods and the asuras got together and churned the waters of the ocean, which was mixed with their milk, using
Mandara as a churning rod. O Matali! They obtained the liquor known as Varuni, Lakshmi, amrita, Uchchaihshrava, the king of the horses, and Koustubha, jewel among all gems. Surabhi provides her milk as sudha for those
who drink sudha, as svadha for those who drink svadha and as amrita for those who drink amrita[Sudha is a beverage of the gods and in this context, is distinct from amrita. Svadha is an oblation offered to the
ancestors.]. In ancient
times, a song was sung by the residents of Rasatala. The learned ones of this world heard this in ancient times and
still sing it. "Dwelling in Rasatala brings greater happiness than in the world of the serpents, or in heaven, or in the
vimanas of the gods."'"'
