Vaishampayana said, 'When the night had passed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira awoke and performed the necessary
rituals, together with his brothers. Then he told Arjuna, the beloved of his brothers. "O Kounteya! Show us the
weapons with which you destroyed the danavas." O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then the immensely energetic Pandava Dhananjaya showed the celestial weapons that had been given by the gods, in due order, and
after establishing himself in supreme purity. The earth was like his chariot and the radiant Dhananjaya seated himself on that. The trees on the mountain were like its axles and the beautiful bamboos like the spokes. He looked resplendent in his bright armour. He grasped the bow Gandiva and the conch shell Devadatta, born from the waters.
In that radiance, mighty-armed Kounteya prepared to show those divine weapons, one after the other.

'As he got ready to employ those divine weapons, the earth and all its trees began to tremble under his feet. The
rivers and the great ocean began to tremble. The mountains were rent asunder. The winds stopped blowing. The
one with the thousand rays[The sun.] stopped shining. The fires stopped burning. The Vedas were no longer manifest to
those who were twice-born[In principle, twice-born can mean brahmanas, kshatriyas or vaishyas, but commonly means brahmanas.]. O Janamejaya! The beings that lived in the interiors of the earth were oppressed.
All of them trembled and emerged. Covering their faces, they joined their hands in salutation and surrounded Pan-
dava. Burnt by those weapons, they prayed to Dhananjaya. The brahmarshis, the siddhas, the maharshis and all
mobile beings stood there. So did supreme rajarshis, gods, yakshas, rakshasas, gandharvas and birds. The grandfather[Brahma.] himself arrived, together with all the lokapalas, and the illustrious Mahadeva, with all his companions. O
great king! Vayu covered Pandava with colourful, fragrant and divine flowers from every side. Instructed by the
gods, the gandharvas sung many songs. O king! Masses of apsaras began to dance there. At that tumultuous time,
instructed by the gods, Narada arrived. O king! He spoke these words, worthy of hearing, to Partha. "O Arjuna! O
Arjuna! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Do not discharge these divine weapons. They should never be used
when there is no target. Even when there is a target, one should not use them unless one is hard-pressed. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Such a use of these weapons is a great sin. O Dhananjaya! If these weapons are properly
preserved, as you have been taught, there is no doubt that they will lead to great happiness. O Pandava! But if they
are not preserved well, they will lead to the destruction of the three worlds. Therefore, never attempt this again. O
Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira.]! You will behold the weapons when Partha uses them in battle for the destruction of the enemies."

O bull among men! After having restrained Partha, all the gods, and all the others who had assembled there, departed the way they had come. O Kouravya[Janamejaya.]! When they had left, the Pandavas, together with Krishna, began to
live happily in that forest.'
