'Lomasha said, "O king! It is said that Prajapati himself sacrificed here in ancient times. That sacrifice, named
ishtikrita, lasted for one thousand years. Ambarisha, the son of Nabhaga, performed a sacrifice on the banks of the
Yamuna. Through his sacrifices and austerities, he attained the supreme objective. This is the region where King
Nahusha[Meaning Yayati, the son of Nahusha.] performed an extremely holy sacrifice and gave away ten padmas to the assisting priests. O
Kounteya! The immensely energetic Yayati was a universal emperor who rivalled Shakra. Behold his sacrificial
ground there. See how the ground is spiked with many different kinds of sacrificial altars and seems to sink down,
under the weight of Yayati's sacrificial deeds. Here is a shami tree[A tree believed to have fire inside it.] with a single leaf. There is a supreme sanctuary. Behold Rama's[Parashurama.] lake. Behold Narayana's hermitage. O lord of the earth! This is the path followed by
Richika's immensely energetic son[Richika's son is Jamadagni and Jamadagni's son is Parashurama. The text uses the word 'son' in an extended sense and Parashurama, rather than Jamadagni, is meant.] when he traversed the earth, immersed in yoga, on the banks of the stream
Roupya.

'"O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When I recited this genealogy, listen to what a pishacha woman, adorned
with ulukhalas[An ulukhala is a wooden mortar used for cleaning rice.], once said. 'Eat curds in Yugandhara[All of these are spots around Kurukshetra.]. Spend the night in Achyutasthala. Then bathe in
Bhutilaya and dwell there with your sons. After having spent one night there, if you stay for a second night, then
the deeds of the day will be different from the deeds of the night[Beyond the suggestion that one shouldn't dwell there for more than one night, it is impossible to understand
what this means.].' O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O
Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Therefore, we will stay here tonight. This is Kurukshetra's gate. O
king! It is here that King Yayati Nahusha performed sacrifices where many jewels were given away, and Indra was
delighted. This is Plakshavatarana, the supreme tirtha on the Yamuna. The learned ones say that it is the gate to the
vault of heaven. The supreme rishis performed sarasvata sacrifices here. O son! With their sacrificial stakes and
mortars, they then went to take their final baths. Following dharma, King Bharata performed a horse sacrifice right
here and let loose a black sacrificial steed to roam the earth. It was here that Marutta, tiger among men, performed
a supreme sacrifice and seated himself, protected by Samvarta, foremost among devarshis. O Indra among kings!
Bathe here and you will be able to see all the worlds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having touched the water here, you will be cleansed of all evil deeds."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having bathed there with his brothers and having been worshipped by the great rishis, the
foremost among the Pandavas then spoke these words to Lomasha. "I can see all the worlds through my austerities.
O one for whom truth is valour! From here, I can also see the foremost among the Pandavas[Meaning Arjuna.], with his white
steeds." Lomasha replied, "O mighty-armed one! That is true. Thus do the great rishis see. Look at the sacred
Sarasvati, crowded by those for whom she is a refuge. O best of men! By bathing here, you will be cleansed of all
sins. The celestial rishis performed the sarasvata sacrifice here. O Kounteya! So did the rishis and the rajarshis.
This is Prajapati's altar, extending five yojanas in every direction. This is the field of the great-souled sacrificer
Kuru[Meaning Kurukshetra. Kshetra means field and Kurukshetra literally means Kuru's field.]."'