Yajnavalkya said, 'O son! O lord of the earth! One cannot describe something without qualities by ascribing
qualities to it. I will tell you the truth about what possesses qualities and what doesn't have qualities. Listen
to me. The great-souled sages who have seen the truth have spoken about the qualities obtained by the one with
qualities and the qualities not obtained by the one without qualities. The unmanifest one[Prakriti.] naturally has qualities
and cannot surpass those qualities. Because she is united with those, she naturally lacks knowledge. The unmanifest Purusha is naturally the one who knows and always thinks, "There is nothing superior to me." It is because of
this reason that this unmanifest one is without consciousness. He is always spoken of as indestructible. But it is
also true that he combines with the destructible[Prakriti.]. It is because of the repeated association with various categories
of qualities that one becomes ignorant. When he does not know his own atman, he is spoken of as the manifest.
When he assumes lordship over those principles[Prakriti.], he is said to follow the dharma of those attributes. Because he
has lordship over wombs, he is said to follow the dharma of wombs. Because he has lordship over Prakriti, he is
said to follow the dharma of Prakriti. Because he has lordship over seeds, he is said to follow the dharma of seeds.
Because he is associated with birth, he observes the dharma of birth[Here, birth is used in the sense of creation.]. Because he has lordship over destruction,
he follows the dharma of destruction. Because of association with Prakriti, he follows creation and destruction.
This is despite the absolute knowing that he is indifferent and distinct. Ascetics who are pure, devoid of anxiety
and knowledgeable about adhyatma, think of him in this way. We have heard of him as permanent and unmanifest,
but also as unstable[Because of the association with Prakriti.]. However, those who depend only on knowledge and are compassionate towards all beings
say that the unmanifest is one and Purusha is many[Prakriti is one and Purusha is many. But clearly, the suggestion is that this is not a valid view.]. There are others who hold that the unmanifest Purusha, even
though apparently unstable, has all the signs of stability. He is distinct, just as a blade of grass is different from its
sheath. The gnat that is inside a fig should be known of as distinct. Despite being associated with the fig, the gnat
doesn't get attached to it. The fish is said to be different from the water it is in. Though the fish is touched by the
water, it isn't in any way attached to it. The fire in a boiler is always known to be distinct. Though the fire touches
the boiler, it isn't attached to it. A lotus is said to be different from the water. Though it touches the water, the lotus
isn't attached to it. In this way, there is always separation, even when one dwells together. This can never be understood by people who are always ordinary. Those who cannot see it in this way, do not see properly. It is evident
that they will repeatedly be submerged in a terrible hell. I have enumerated the supreme philosophy of sankhya.
Enumerating it in this way, those who follow sankhya obtain the absolute. I have also told you about the others
who are accomplished and know the truth about the manifestations. I will now tell you about the philosophy of
yoga.'"'
