'"Rama said, 'O father! It is because of my sins that you have been killed, like a deer in the forest, by the arrows of
those mean and foolish wretches, Kartavirya's heirs. O father! You were learned in dharma. You were always
steady in the path of the righteous. You did not cause harm to any beings. How did you deserve a death like this?
You were aged and you were unwilling to fight. You were established in your austerities. What sins they must have
committed when they killed you with hundreds of sharp arrows. How can they tell their advisers and well-wishers
that they have killed a virtuous man who was unwilling to fight?"'

'Akritavarna said, "O king! Thus did he lament in piteous tones and in many ways. Then the immensely ascetic
one performed all the funereal rites for his father. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rama, the vanquisher of
enemy cities, then burnt his father in a fire and swore that he would destroy all kshatriyas. Extremely wrathful, immensely strong in battle and valorous, he then grasped his weapons. Alone, like the god of death, he killed Kartavirya's sons. O bull among the kshatriya lineage! He then killed all the kshatriyas who were their followers.
Rama, supreme among those who wield arms, destroyed them all. That lord removed kshatriyas from the earth
twenty-one times. He built five lakes of blood in Samantapanchaka. The extender of the Bhrigu lineage offered
oblations to his ancestors there.

'"Then Richika appeared before Rama in person and restrained him. Then Jamadagni's powerful son performed
a great sacrifice. He satisfied the king of the gods and gave the earth to the officiating priests. O lord of the earth!
He constructed a golden altar that was ten vyamas[A vyama is a measure of length. When the arms are extended, it is the distance from the tips of the fingers
of one hand to the tips of the fingers of the other. A vyama is thus roughly equal to 2 yards.] long and nine in height and gave it to the great-souled
Kashyapa. O king! With Kashyapa's permission, the brahmanas divided it into many pieces and they[The brahmanas. Khanda means a piece.] thus came
to be known as Khandavayanas. Having given the earth to the great-souled Kashyapa[Earlier, the earth was given to the officiating priests.], the infinitely valorous
one began to live on Mahendra, the king of the mountains. Thus did enmity arise between him and the kshatriyas
of this world. The entire earth was conquered by Rama, whose energy is infinite."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On the fourteenth lunar day, at the appropriate time, the great-souled Rama showed himself to the brahmanas and to Dharmaraja, together with his younger brothers. The Indra among kings worshipped
the lord, together with his brothers. The supreme of kings offered the highest homage to the brahmanas. Having
worshipped Jamadagni's son and having been honoured in return, the lord spent a night on Mahendra and then left
for a southern direction.'
