Bhishma said, "O king! The maharshis, with Atri as the foremost, were wandering around in the forest, eating
roots and fruits. As they roamed around, they saw a mendicant named Shunasakha. His shoulders, hands, feet,
mouth and stomach were plump and his limbs were stout. The beautiful Arundhati saw that all his limbs were well
formed. She told the rishis, 'You are not like him. Nor will you ever be.' Vasishtha said, 'His agnihotra fire is not
like ours. Morning and evening, he pours oblations into it, while we can't. That is the reason Shunasakha is stout.'

Atri said, 'Unlike us, he doesn't suffer from hunger. He possesses vigour and control. Unlike ours, his learning
hasn't been destroyed. That is the reason Shunasakha is stout.' Vishvamitra said, 'We are suffering from decay.
Unlike us, he is able to sustain the eternal sacred texts. We have become lazy, overcome by hunger and stupid.
That is the reason Shunasakha is stout.' Jamadagni said, 'Unlike us, he does not have to think at all about the annual store of food and kindling. That is the reason Shunasakha is stout.' Kashyapa said, 'Unlike us, he does not have
four brothers who beg and solicit alms[The number four is incomprehensible. Speculatively, it might mean the four kinds of creatures-born from
wombs, born from eggs, born from sweat and plants and herbs.]. That is the reason Shunasakha is stout.' Bharadvaja said, 'Unlike us, he
is devoted to the brahman. His consciousness is not clouded by grief because of the wife's recriminations[As a consequence of food not being available.]. That
is the reason Shunasakha is stout.' Goutama said, 'Unlike us, he is not clad in three pieces of kusha grass and one
piece of ranku[Kind of deer.] hide. These are also three years old. That is the reason Shunasakha is stout.' On seeing the maharshis, the mendicant Shunasakha approached them. Observing the appropriate custom, he greeted them by touching their hands. They spoke to each other about how difficult it was to roam around in the forest, hunting for food.
For some time, they remained together.

'"After this, they departed. They roamed around in the forest again, single-minded in their task of collecting
roots and fruits. Once, as they were wandering around, they saw a beautiful lake that was full of lotuses. The banks
were thick with rare trees. The water was pure and transparent. The lotuses were beautiful in form, with complexions like that of the rising sun. The lake was covered with the petals of lotuses, with a complexion like that of lapis
lazuli. There were many kinds of aquatic birds that lived in the water. There was a single path that led down to the
water. It was easy of access and was free of mud. Engaged by Vrishadarbhi, the demoness known as Yatudhani,
terrible to see, protected the lotuses. With Shunasakha to help them, the maharshis sought some lotus stalks. All of
them wished to approach the lotuses, protected by the demoness. They saw Yatudhani, with a terrible visage. She
was stationed on the banks of the lake. The maharshis addressed the demoness. 'Who are you, standing here alone?
Who are you waiting for and what is your purpose? You are stationed on the banks of this lake. What do you wish
to do?' Yatudhani replied, 'Whoever I might be, you should never question me. O ones rich in austerities! Know
that I am the one who protects all the riches of this lake.' The rishis said, 'All of us are afflicted by hunger. We
have been able to obtain nothing. With your permission, let all of us gather some lotus stalks.' Yatudhani replied,
'As long as there is a compact, you can gather lotus stalks as you wish. One after another, you must tell me your
names. Without any delay, you can then gather the lotus-stalks.' Having told them that she was Yatudhani, the demoness wished to kill the rishis. Atri was overcome by hunger and spoke these words. 'I am the one who saves. I
study thrice a day. There is no night during which I have not studied. O beautiful one! Know that this is the reason
why my name is Atri[A translation can't capture the etymology-trayate (save, with a root in tra), tri (thrice) and ratri (night).].' Yatudhani replied, 'O great sage! You have told me the truth about your name, though I
am unable to comprehend the explanation. But you can descend into the lake.' Vasishtha said, 'I am Vasishtha. I
am the foremost. I reside in wealth and houses. Know that since I am the foremost and since I reside, I am Vasishtha[Wealth means the wealth of austerities and the word for wealth is vasu. Similarly, vasati (with a root in vas)
means residence/house as a noun and to reside as a verb. The word for foremost is Varishtha and this is somewhat forced.].' Yatudhani replied, 'You have told me your name, though I am sorry that I cannot understand what you
have said about the syllables. But I am incapable of barring you any more. Descend into the lake.' Kashyapa said,
'I am the mooring for my lineage and I am radiant like the sun[Kupa is the post to which a boat or ship is moored and kupapa is the sun.]. Since I come from Kashi, know that I am the
brahmana who bears the name of Kashyapa.' Yatudhani replied, 'O great sage! You have told me the truth about
your name, though I am unable to comprehend the explanation. But you can descend into the lake.' Bharadvaja
said, 'O beautiful one! I support my sons[Bhara means maintain/support. Avyaja means easily, without deceit.]. I support my disciples. I support the gods. I support brahmanas. I support my wife. Since I do this easily, I am Bharadvaja.' Yatudhani replied, 'You have told me your name, though I
am sorry that I cannot understand what you have said about the syllables. But I am incapable of barring you any
more. Descend into the lake.' Goutama said, 'O demoness! O Yatudhani! Listen to me. I have conquered the sky
and earth through my self-restraint[Go means the earth or sky and dama is self-restraint. Quite forced, dhuma is smoke.]. I travel using my self-restraint. I am like a fire without smoke. Because of
my self-restraint, you will find it extremely difficult to look at me. Know me to be Goutama.' Yatudhani replied,
'O great sage! You have told me the truth about your name and I am incapable of barring you any more. Descend
into  the  lake.'  Vishvamitra  said,  'The  gods  of  the  universe  are  my  friends[Vishva means universe and mitra means friend.].  The  cattle  are  my  friends.  O
Yatudhani! Listen to me. I am known as Vishvamitra.' Yatudhani replied, 'You have told me your name, though I
am sorry that I cannot understand what you have said about the syllables. But I am incapable of barring you any
more. Descend into the lake.' Jamadagni said, 'O beautiful one! I have been born from the sacrifices of those who
have  no  birth[The derivation of Jamadagni's name is extremely difficult to understand. Jajama is to have been born and ajaja
means one without birth, that is, a god. Mrija is purity and jijavayishati is to inspire.].  I  provide  inspiration  because  of  my  purity.  Know  that  it  is  the  view  that  I  am  Jamadagni.'

Yatudhani replied, 'O great sage! You have told me the truth about your name and I am incapable of barring you
any more. Descend into the lake.' Arundhati said, 'I stand next to my husband and hold up the earth. My mind
gently follows my husband[Dharati is to hold up, while dharitri/vasundhara means the earth. Anu means to follow and rundhati is to slow
down, that is, follow gently.]. Therefore, know me to be Arundhati.' Yatudhani replied, 'You have told me your
name, though I am sorry that I cannot understand what you have said about the syllables. But I am incapable of
barring you any more. Descend into the lake.' Ganda said, 'The side of my face has a lump[Ganda means side of the face or cheek. It also means an elevation or lump, like goitre.]. I bear that mark of a
lump on the cheek. O one who has been born from the fire! Because of the lump that stands out on my cheek,
know me to Ganda.' Yatudhani replied, 'You have told me your name, though I am sorry that I cannot understand
what you  have said about the syllables. But  I  am  incapable  of  barring  you  any  more.  Descend  into  the  lake.'

Pashusakha said, 'O one who has been born from the fire! O friend! I am a friend to, and friendly towards, animals,
especially towards cows[Sakha is friend and animal is pashu.]. Therefore, know me to be Pashusakha. Yatudhani replied, 'You  have told me your
name, though I am sorry that I cannot understand what you have said about the syllables. But I am incapable of
barring you any more. Descend into the lake.' Shunasakha said, 'I am not interested in explaining my name the
way they have done[Shunasakha means a friend to dogs.]. O Yatudhani! However, you should reflect on the fact that I am known by the name of Shunasakha.' Yatudhani replied, 'The words that you have spoken are not clear. Your words are ambiguous. O brahmana! Therefore, tell me your name properly.' Shunasakha said, 'I have told you my name properly, though you
have been unable to grasp it. Therefore, I will strike you with my triple stick[A mendicant carries a staff made up of three sticks joined together.]. May you instantly be reduced to
ashes.' That stick was like the curse of a brahmana. Struck by  it on  the head, the demoness fell down  on  the
ground, reduced to ashes. Shunasakha thus slew the immensely strong Yatudhani.

'"Having done this, he stuck his triple staff on the ground and sat down on a grassy spot. As they wished, all the
sages collected lotus stalks. Delighted, they then arose. Having collected bundles of lotus stalks, they were full of
exhaustion. They flung these down on the banks and again entered the lake to offer oblations of water. O  bull
among men! Having arisen from the water, all of them looked around, but could no longer see the lotus stalks. The
rishis said, 'We were overcome with hunger. Which wicked person has stolen what belongs to us? We desired to
eat those lotus stalks. Who has acted in this cruel way?' Those bulls among brahmanas suspected each other and
questioned each other. O afflicter of enemies! They told each other that all of them would have to swear an oath.
When all of them said this, Shunasakha tried to restrain them. But they were hungry and exhausted and prepared to
swear. Atri said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotus stalks touch cattle with his feet, urinate while facing the
sun and study in a forbidden way.' Vasishtha said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotus stalks not study, suffer
affliction from dogs, live a life of mendicancy, slay his friends and those who seek refuge, earn a living through his
daughter and seek riches from wicked people and thieves.' Kashyapa said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotus
stalks gamble everywhere, destroy trust, bear false witness, eat the flesh of animals killed in vain, make unsuccessful donations and have intercourse with his wife during the day.' Bharadvaja said, 'Let the person who has stolen
the lotus stalks be addicted towards cruel adharma vis-à-vis women, relatives and cattle, let him defeat brahmanas,
let him defy his preceptor and study the Rig Veda and the Yajur Veda and let him offer oblations into fires that are
kindled with straw.' Jamadagni said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotus stalks release excrement into the water, kill milk-yielding cattle, indulge in sexual intercourse outside the season, be hated and have enemies, live off
his wife, make friends with difficulty and become someone else's guest[Instead of guests coming to his house.].' Goutama said, 'Let the person who has
stolen the lotus stalks discard the Vedas after studying them, throw away the three sacrificial fires, sell soma, dwell
in a village that has a common well, and live with a brahmana who has a vrishala for his wife.' Vishvamitra said,
'Let the person who has stolen the lotus stalks be faced with a situation where his seniors and servants are maintained by other people, though he is alive. Despite many children, let him not accomplish his purpose. Let him be
an impure and crooked brahmana. Let him be insolent because of his prosperity. Let him have to till the soil and let
him be malicious. During the rains, let him be a servant of the king. Let the thief be an officiating priest for someone who is not entitled to perform a sacrifice.' Arundhati said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotus stalks always cause grief to her mother-in-law and her husband. Let her be evil in intelligence. Let her eat the tasty food
alone. In the midst of her family, at the end of the day, let her be made to eat only saktu. Despite giving birth to a
brave son, let her be unfortunate[If a brahmana lady gives birth to a son who fights, that is not fortunate.].' Ganda said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotus stalks always speak
falsehoods and act against the virtuous. Let her have to bestow her daughter in marriage in exchange for a price.
Let her eat the food she has cooked alone. Let her spend her life as a servant maid. Let her be destroyed because of
her perverse deeds.' Pashusakha said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotus stalks give birth to servants. Let him
have worthless offspring. Let him never worship the gods.' Shunasakha responded, 'Let the person who has taken
away the lotus stalks bestow his daughter in marriage on a revered brahmana who knows the metres and observes
brahmacharya. Let him bathe after having studied the Atharva Veda.' The rishis replied, 'The oath you have taken
is something desired by brahmanas. O Shunasakha! You must have stolen all our lotus stalks.' Shunasakha said,
'What you left here can no longer be seen. What you have said is true. I have done the deed. It isn't a lie. I have
stolen the lotus stalks. While you looked on, I made the lotus stalks vanish. O illustrious ones! O  unblemished
ones! I did that to test you. I have come here to protect all of you. Yatudhani was an extremely angry demoness
who desired to kill you. She was invoked by Vrishadarbhi. O ones rich in austerities! I have slain her. That evil and
wicked one was generated from the fire, so as to cause injury to you. O brahmanas! That is the reason I have come
here. Know me to be Vasava. Since you are without avarice, you have obtained the indestructible worlds that satisfy all the objects of desire. O brahmanas! Arise quickly from this spot and go there.' Thus addressed by Purandara,
the maharshis were delighted. With Indra of the gods, all of them went to heaven. Those great-souled ones suffered
hardships from supreme hunger. Yet, because they did not succumb to greed, they obtained heaven. In this way,
those  great-souled  ones  enjoyed  many  objects  of  pleasure.  Therefore,  in  every  situation,  a  man  must  abandon
greed. O king! Lack of avarice is known as supreme dharma. If a man recites this account of good conduct in an
assembly, he obtains a share of happiness and does not have to face difficulties. The ancestors, the rishis and the
gods are pleased with him. After death, such a man obtains fame, dharma and artha."'
