Souti said, 'A Brahmana and his wife had entered his throat and began to burn the bird's throat like a piece of coal.
The giant bird said, "O best among the twice-born! Come out of my open mouth quickly. A Brahmana will never
be killed by me, even if he is always associated with those who commit sin." When Garuda said this, the Brahmana replied, "My wife is a nishada. Let her come out with me." Garuda said, "Take the nishada with you and
come out immediately. Save yourself, before you are digested by the energy in my stomach." Thereupon, the Brahmana emerged with the nishada woman. Praising Garuda, he went to the country where he wished to go. When the
Brahmana and his wife emerged, the king of birds, swift as the mind, stretched his wings and rose up into the sky.

'He then saw his father[Kashyapa.], who asked him about his welfare and he replied, "I have been sent by the snakes to
steal the supreme soma. I shall bring it today, to free my mother from her slavery. My mother instructed me to eat
the nishadas. But even after eating them in their thousands, my hunger is not yet satisfied. O illustrious one! O
lord! Show me some other food that I can eat, so that I am strong enough to steal the amrita."

'Kashyapa said, "In ancient times, there was a maharshi named Vibhavasu. He became angry very easily. He
had a younger brother named Supratika[Supratika is a common name for an elephant and this elephant should not be confused with Bhagadatta's elephant Supratika.], who was a great ascetic. That great sage was unwilling to maintain their
wealth jointly with his brother and Supratika always spoke of dividing it. After some time, Vibhavasu told his
brother Supratika, 'It is from delusion that many wish to divide common property. Once it has been divided, they
are deluded from love of wealth. Ignorant from selfishness, enmity is created, though there is a disguise of friendship. Others, knowing them estranged in property matters, increase the enmity on other matters and divided relatives meet their downfall. Absolute ruin soon comes to those who are separated. That is the reason why learned
ones never approve partition among brothers. When divided, they do not have any respect for the sacred texts or
preceptors. O Supratika! You are beyond my control. Disregarding my advice and out of love for riches, you wish
for a partition. I curse you that you will become an elephant.' Thus cursed, Supratika told Vibhavasu, 'You will
become a tortoise that lives in the water.' Cursed by each other and their minds deluded by desire, they became an
elephant and a tortoise, animals of low birth. Boastful of their strengths and sizes, as earlier, they have continued in
their vice of enmity towards each other, living in this huge lake. Look at one of them, the large and handsome elephant, come towards this lake now. Hearing his trumpeting, the giant tortoise that lives under water rises out of the
lake, agitating its waters. On seeing him, the valorous elephant curls his trunk and rushes into the water, violently
moving his tusks, trunk, tail and feet. The water that is full of fishes is agitated. The valorous tortoise also raises its
head and comes up to fight. The elephant is six yojanas[A yojana is between 13 and 15 kilometres.] in height and double that in length. The tortoise is three
yojanas in height and ten yojanas in circumference. These two are maddened at the prospect of fighting each other
and wish to kill each other. Eat them up and swiftly accomplish the task you wish to perform." Hearing his father's
words, the bird swooped down from the sky and swiftly grasped the elephant and the tortoise, one in each claw.

'The bird then flew high up into the sky. It went to the tirtha[Sacred place of pilgrimage.] named Alamba and saw many celestial trees
there. Struck by the wind raised by his wings, the trees trembled in fear. Those celestial trees had golden branches
and were scared that these would be broken. Seeing that the trees bore fruit and shoots capable of granting all desires and that they were quivering in fright, the bird went to other trees, incomparable in colour and shape. Those
giant trees had fruit of gold and silver, with branches of lapis lazuli. They were washed by the waters of the ocean.

'A giant sandalwood[Alternatively, fig tree.] tree stood there and spoke to the best of the birds, as he was swiftly swooping down
with the speed of the mind. "Descend on my giant branch, which extends for one hundred yojanas, and eat the elephant and the tortoise." Then the supreme among the birds, as giant as a mountain, descended swiftly on the tree,
shaking the branches that housed a thousand birds, and broke the branch that was full of leaves.'
