'Sanjaya said, "I will tell you everything, as I have seen it with my own eyes. Listen with patience. Your faults
have been great. When waters have receded after a flood, the construction of an embankment is useless. O king! O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Lamentation is pointless. Do not sorrow. Know that the decrees of destiny are
wonderful and cannot be transgressed. O best among the Bharata lineage! Do not grieve. This destiny is ancient. If,
in earlier times, you had restrained Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, or your own sons from gambling with the dice, you
would not have confronted this calamity. Yet again, when the time for battle arrived, had you restrained both the
angry parties, you would not have confronted this calamity. If, in earlier times, you had instructed the Kurus to kill
the disobedient Duryodhana, you would not have confronted this calamity. Then the Pandavas, the Panchalas, the
Vrishnis and all the other great ones would never have blamed you for your lack of intelligence. Had you performed the duties of a father and directed your son to a righteous path, making him follow dharma, you would not
have confronted this calamity. You are the wisest person in this world, but you abandoned eternal dharma, following the counsel of Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni. O king! You are addicted to artha. And all these lamentations
of yours that I hear seem to be like honey laced with poison. O king! In earlier times, Krishna did not revere the
Pandava king[Yudhishthira.], Bhishma or Drona as much as he revered you. But when he knew that you had been dislodged
from the dharma of kings, from that time, Krishna no longer regards you with high honour. When your sons addressed harsh words towards the Parthas, despite they being under your control, you remained indifferent, coveting
the kingdom for them. O unblemished one! You obtained the kingdom from your fathers and grandfathers and it
will be lost. And so will the entire earth that has been conquered by the Parthas[In addition to the ancestral kingdom, the Pandavas conquered many countries and extended the kingdom.]. The fame and the kingdom of
the Kouravas are because of what the sons of Pandus won. The Pandavas followed dharma and added a lot to
those. But having encountered you, those deeds of theirs became extremely fruitless. They were dislodged from
their kingdom because of your avarice. O king! Now that the time for battle has arrived, you are censuring your
sons. You have indicated the many faults that they possess. But this is not deserved. When kings fight in battle,
they do not seek to protect their lives. The bulls among kshatriyas are fighting, penetrating the army of the Parthas.
Who other than the Kouravas will seek to fight with an army of soldiers protected by Krishna, Arjuna, Satyaki and
Vrikodara? Their warrior is Gudakesha[Arjuna.] and their counsellor is Janardana. They are protected by Satyaki and
they are protected by Vrikodara. Other than the Kouravas and those who are following them, which mortal archer
would dare to fight against these? With the devoted kings, the brave Kouravas are doing whatever they are capable
of, devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Now listen to the supremely grievous battle between those tigers among
men, the Kurus and the Pandavas. Listen exactly to everything that occurred."'
