'Sanjaya said, "O great king! On hearing Arjuna's words, the maharathas there did not say anything to Dhananjaya, pleasant or unpleasant. O bull among the Bharata lineage! However, mighty-armed Bhimasena was angry and
spoke these words, censuring Kounteya Arjuna. 'O Partha! You speak words full of dharma, like a hermit who has
retired to the forest, or like a brahmana rigid in his vows raising his staff. Saving others from injury, protecting
one's own life from injury and exhibiting forgiveness towards women and the virtuous-with these qualities, a
kshatriya swiftly obtains the earth and attains dharma, fame and prosperity. O extender of the lineage! You are
vested with all the qualities of kshatriyas. It is not proper that you should now speak like one who is ignorant. O
Kounteya! Your valour is like that of Shakra, Shachi's consort. Like the ocean does not cross the shoreline, you do
not transgress dharma. Which person amongst us will not applaud you? Serving dharma, you pushed back your
rage for thirteen years. O son[The word used is tata.]! It is through good fortune that your mind has turned towards your own dharma
today. O one without decay! It is through good fortune that your mind has turned towards non-violence today. With
the kingdom deprived through adharma, you have turned towards dharma. Droupadi was supremely afflicted when
she was brought into the assembly hall by the enemy. We were exiled to the forest, with bark and deerskin as garments. We did not deserve this, but we were made to endure it for thirteen years by the enemy. O unblemished one!
These are reasons for anger, but you have abandoned your rage. Yet, you say that you are devoted to the dharma of
kshatriyas in every way. "Remembering all those acts of adharma, I have united with you today. I will kill the inferior ones who have robbed us of the kingdom, together with their followers." This is what you said earlier, when
we assembled to do battle. "I will strive to the utmost of my capacity." But you are censuring us now. You have
said that you wish to abide by your own dharma, but you are falsifying those words now. We are afflicted by fear
and your words are striking us in our inner organs. O destroyer of enemies! You are pouring a corrosive onto the
sores of those who are wounded. My heart has been shattered, afflicted by the stakes of your words. You are great
in your adharma. You do not know what it means to follow dharma. You have not praised us, though we have been
praiseworthy. You have praised one who is not even one-sixteenth part of you[Arjuna has praised Ashvatthama, who has one-sixteenth of Arjuna's qualities. The text uses the word kala. The
moon has sixteen kalas or phases and sixteen kalas constitute the whole.]. You have spoken about your own
self, but not about those who are vested with all the qualities. In my anger, I can rend the earth and shatter the
mountains. I can hurl the terrible and heavy club that is garlanded with gold, and with it I can shatter trees that are
as large as mountains and uproot them like the wind. O bull among men! You should know that your brother is
such a person. O one with infinite valour! You should not be frightened of Drona's son. O Bibhatsu! Otherwise,
stay here, with all the bulls among men. With the club in my hand, I will defeat him in this great battle.'

'"Then the son of the king of Panchala spoke to Partha, like Hiranyakashipu speaking to an angry and roaring
Hari[Hari is Vishnu. Hiranyakashipu was a king of the asuras, killed by Vishnu is his narasimha (man-lion)
incarnation.]. 'O Bibhatsu! The learned ones have laid down certain tasks for brahmanas-officiating at sacrifices, teaching, donations, performance of sacrifices, receiving gifts and sixth, studying. O Partha! You have reproached me.
To which of these was Drona, who has been slain by me, devoted? He transgressed his own dharma and devoted
himself to the dharma of kshatriyas. The performer of inferior deeds killed us through the use of superhuman
weapons. He said that he was a brahmana, but resorted to the use of maya. O Partha! He has himself been slain
through the use of maya today. So what? If Drona has been punished by me and his son roars loudly and fiercely in
anger, how do I suffer because of that? I do not think it is extraordinary that Drona's son should only roar in this
way. He is incapable of protecting the Kouravas and will cause their death. You say that you are devoted to dharma
and have described me as my preceptor's killer. But it was for that reason that I was born from the fire, as the son
of Panchala. O Dhananjaya! How can you describe him as a brahmana or a kshatriya? When he fought in the battle, he thought good and evil acts were the same. Overcome by anger, he used the brahmastra to even kill those
who were unacquainted with the use of weapons. O supreme among men! Why should we not use any means to
kill him? Those who know about dharma say that those who are for adharma are like poison. O Arjuna! You know
about dharma and artha. Why are you censuring me? He was violent and I brought him down from his chariot. O
Bibhatsu! Why are you reproaching me? You should congratulate me. O Partha! In the battle, I have severed the
terrible Drona's head. He was like the blazing sun and like poison. I should be praised, but you are not praising me.
In the battle, he slew my relatives and not those of anyone else. Having only severed his head, my fever[Mental fever.] has not
been assuaged. My heart is still suffering, because I did not hurl his head, like Jayadratha's head, into the land of
the nishadas[The nishadas were regarded as an inferior race and so was their territory.]. O Arjuna! It has been instructed that not killing one's enemy is tantamount to adharma. Yet again,
the dharma of kshatriyas is to kill, or be killed. O Pandava! In accordance with dharma, I have killed my enemy in
the battle. This is just as you killed the brave Bhagadatta, your father's friend[Bhagadatta was Indra's friend.]. Having struck your grandfather[Bhishma.]
in the battle, you thought that you were acting in accordance with dharma. When I killed my wicked enemy, why
do you not think that it is dharma? O Arjuna! The eldest Pandava is not a liar. Nor have I acted in accordance with
adharma. The wicked one slew his disciples. Fight and victory will be yours.'"'
