Dhritarashtra said, "Arjuna killed all of us easily, as he wished. I don't think Yama would have escaped, had he
attacked him in a battle. O fortunate one! Partha robbed single-handed. Single-handed, he satisfied Agni[In the burning of the Khandava forest, described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. He
vanquished the earth single-handed and made all the powerful kings offer tribute[A reference to the conquest of the earth, described in Section 23 (Volume 2).]. Single-handedly, using his
divine bow, he killed the nivatakavachas[This has been described in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. He fought single-handedly with Sharva, who was in the form of a
hunter[Sharva and Bhava are Shiva's names. This is a reference to the incidents of Section 31 (Volume 2).]. He protected the Bharatas single-handed and satisfied Bhava[The protection of the Bharatas is a reference to the gandharva incident of Section 39 (Volume 3).]. Fierce in his energy, he single-handedly defeated all those on my side. They[The Kouravas.] should not be censured. Tell me what they did next."

'Sanjaya replied, "They were killed, wounded and shattered. They were deprived of their armour and the vehicles that bore them in war. Their voices were distressed. Those insolent ones grieved and were defeated by the enemy. The Kouravas went to their camps and sought counsel and advice from each other. They were like serpents
that had been defanged and had lost their poison, having then been trod on by the foot. Karna angrily spoke to
them, sighing like a snake. He rubbed one hand against another hand and glanced towards your son[Duryodhana.]. 'Arjuna is
always firm, skilled and persevering. He understands and when the time is right, Adhokshaja[Vishnu's name, meaning one who is beyond the senses.] instructs him. We
were deceived by him today, because of that sudden shower of weapons. O lord of the earth! But tomorrow, I will
destroy all his intentions[Though not explicitly stated, this is being said by Karna.].' Thus addressed by him, the supreme among kings gave his assent. Having cheerfully
spent the night, they emerged to do battle. They saw that Dharmaraja had constructed an invincible vyuha, which
the foremost among the Kurus had constructed according to the injunctions of Brihaspati and Ushanas[Brihaspati and Shukra (Ushanas) are respectively the preceptors of the gods and the demons.]. At this,
Duryodhana remembered Karna, whose shoulders were like that of a bull. He was in control of his soul and could
counteract the deeds of others. He was Purandara's equal in a battle and as strong as the masses of Maruts. Karna
was like Kartyavirya[Kartavirya Arjuna.] in his valour and the king's mind turned towards him. The son of a suta was a great
archer, and in a hardship, one turns towards a relative.

'Dhritarashtra said, "In that miserable situation, your minds turned towards Vaikartana Karna. Did you look towards him, like those afflicted with cold glance towards the sun? After the retreat was over, the battle commenced
again. O Sanjaya! How did Vaikartana Karna fight then? How did all the Pandavas fight there, with the son of a
suta? The mighty-armed Karna could single-handedly kill the Parthas and the Somakas. It is my view that the valour of Karna's arms is equal to that of Shakra and Vishnu. The great-souled one's weapons and valour are extremely terrible. He saw that Duryodhana was severely afflicted by the Pandavas and he also saw that the sons of Pandu
were extremely powerful in that great battle. Yet again, in the battle, the proud Duryodhana had relied on Karna to
defeat the Parthas, their sons and Keshava. It is a great sorrow that the powerful Karna could not overcome the
sons of Pandu in the encounter. There is no doubt that destiny is supreme. The consequences of that terrible gambling match have arrived now. Alas! These terrible miseries are the result of what Duryodhana did. O Sanjaya! I
am bearing all these extremely fierce stakes. O son[The word used is tata.]! Soubala[Shakuni.] was revered as one who knew about policy. O
Sanjaya! Though this is named a battle, it is a gambling match that is going on. I am always hearing about my sons
being killed and defeated. There is no one who is capable of countering the Pandavas in battle and they are immersing themselves, as if in the midst of a crowd of women. Destiny is certainly most powerful."

'Sanjaya said, "Those deeds have been done and you are thinking about them now. Those deeds should not have
been done. But thinking about them brings destruction. The deeds that you did are long distant from memory. You
did what should not have been done, and you did not think then about what would be obtained, and what would not
be obtained, from those deeds. O king! You have been told several times not to fight with the Pandavas. O lord of
the earth! But because of your delusion, you did not accept that advice about the Pandavas. You performed many
terrible deeds against the sons of Pandu. It is because of what you did that this terrible destruction of kings is taking place. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But all that has transpired. Do not sorrow about it. O one without decay! Listen to a detailed account of the terrible destruction that happened.

' "When night was over and it was morning, Karna went to the king. Meeting Duryodhana, the mighty-armed
one said, 'O king! I will clash against Pandu's illustrious son today. Either I will kill that brave one, or he will kill
me. O lord of the earth! O king! Because of the many things that Partha and I have done, this clash between me
and Arjuna has not taken place earlier. O lord of the earth! I am speaking these words in accordance with my wisdom. Listen to them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will not return without having killed Partha in battle.
The foremost of our soldiers have been killed and I am the one who will be stationed in battle. Partha will attack
me, now that I am without Shakra's spear[Indra (Shakra) gave Karna a spear that would kill only one person. In Section 70 (Volume 6),
it was used up to kill Ghatotkacha.]. O lord of men! Therefore, listen to what is beneficial. The valour of
my weapons is equal to the energy of Arjuna's. Savyasachi is not my equal in fighting against great warriors, dexterity, shooting from a distance, skill and the use of weapons. My bow, Vijaya, is supreme among all weapons.
Vishvakarma[The architect of the gods.] constructed it for Indra's sake. It was with this that Shatakratu vanquished large numbers of
daityas. In the ten directions, the daityas were confounded because of its roar. Shakra gave that revered weapon to
Bhargava and Bhargava gave that divine and supreme bow to me[Karna studied weapons under Parashurama (Bhargava).]. With this, I will fight against the mighty-
armed Arjuna, foremost among victorious ones, like Indra fighting in a battle against all the assembled daityas.
Rama[Parashurama.] gave me this terrible bow and it is superior to Gandiva. It was with this bow that he[Parashurama.] conquered the
earth twenty-one times. Bhargava told me about this bow's divine deeds and Rama gave it to me. I will use it to
fight against Pandava. O Duryodhana! I will delight you and your relatives today. I will kill the brave Arjuna, foremost among victorious ones, in the battle. O king! The entire earth, with its mountains, forests, islands and oceans,
will be yours, for your sons and your grandsons to be established in, without any opposition. There is nothing that I
cannot accomplish today, especially if it is something that brings you pleasure, just as one who has controlled his
soul and follows dharma is certain to obtain success. Like a tree against fire, he will not be able to stand against me
in the battle. But I must certainly tell you how I am inferior to Phalguna. His bowstring is divine and his large
quivers are inexhaustible. He possesses a celestial and supreme bow and Gandiva is invincible in battle. I also possess a supreme, great and divine bow known as Vijaya. O king! Therefore, in the matter of bows, I am superior to
Partha. Listen to how that brave Pandava is superior to me. His reins are held by Dasharha, who is revered by all
the worlds. His divine chariot is decorated with gold and was given to him by Agni. O brave one! It is impenetrable in every way and his horses are as swift as thought. His standard is divine and, with the resplendent ape atop it,
causes wonder. Krishna, the creator of the universe, protects that chariot. Though I am inferior to him in these respects, I still wish to fight with Pandava. But this brave Shalya, the ornament of assemblies, is his[Krishna's.] equal. If he
acts as my charioteer, there will certainly be victory. Shalya is incapable of being resisted by the enemy. Therefore,
let him be my charioteer. Let a large number of carts bear iron arrows that are shafted with the feathers of vultures.
O Indra among kings! Let supreme horses be yoked to the best of chariots. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let
these always follow me from the rear. Through these, my qualities will be superior to those of Partha. Shalya
knows more about horses than Krishna, and I am superior to Arjuna. Just as Dasharha, the destroyer of enemy heroes, knows about the minds of horses, maharatha Shalya also knows about horses. There is no one who is equal to
the king of Madra in the strength of his arms. Just as there is no archer who is equal to me in weapons, there is no
one who is equal to Shalya in knowledge of horses. In this fashion, my chariot will become superior to that of
Partha's. O great king! O scorcher of enemies! I have told you what I desire. Please do this. Let all these wishes of
mine be satisfied. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You will then see what I accomplish in this battle. In every
way, I will vanquish all the Pandavas, when they advance against me.' Duryodhana replied, 'O Karna! I will do
everything that you have thought of. O son of a suta! Chariots, with implements and horses, will follow you. There
will be many carts, bearing iron arrows tufted with the feathers of vultures. O Karna! We, and all these kings, will
follow you.' O great king! Having spoken thus, your powerful son went to the king of Madra and spoke these
words to him." '
