Sanjaya said, "Having been thus addressed by Yudhishthira, Kounteya, borne on the white horses, angrily grasped
his sword, wishing to kill the bull among the Bharata lineage. On witnessing his wrath, Keshava, who knew about
thoughts, spoke. 'O Partha! Why have you grasped your sword in this way? O Dhananjaya! I do not see anyone
here with whom you need to fight. All the sons of Dhritarashtra have been devastated by the intelligent Bhima. O
Kounteya! You withdrew to seek the king. King Yudhishthira is cheerful and well. You have seen that tiger among
men, whose valour is like that of a tiger. This is a time for rejoicing. Why are you overcome by anger? O
Kounteya! I do not see anyone here who should be killed by you. Why have you quickly taken up this large
sword? O Kounteya! I am asking you about this. What do you wish to do? O one who is extraordinary in valour!
You have angrily grasped this supreme sword.' Having been thus addressed by Krishna, Arjuna glanced towards
Yudhishthira. He sighed like a serpent and told Govinda, 'If anyone asks me to hand over Gandiva to someone
else, I will slice off his head. That has been my secret vow. O infinitely valorous one! You have heard what the
king with the miserable soul told me in your presence. O Govinda! I have no interest in pardoning him. Therefore,
I will kill the king who is always scared about deviating from dharma. I will kill that supreme among men and protect my pledge. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! That is the reason I have picked up the sword. I will kill Yudhishthira and repay my debt to the cause of truth. O Janardana! In that way, I will be without sorrow and without
fever. Now that such an occasion has arisen, what do you think? O father[The word used is tata. Though it means father, it is affectionately used towards anyone who is senior or elder.]! You know everything about the universe, its past and its future. I will do whatever you ask me to.'

' "Krishna replied, 'O Partha! I now know that you have never attended to those who are old. O tiger among
men! You have fallen prey to wrath at the wrong time. O Dhananjaya! No one who knows about the gradations of
dharma acts in this way. Thinking something to be a duty, you are engaging in a task that is not a duty. O Partha! It
is the worst of men who performs tasks that should not be performed. You should follow the dharma that wise ones
have resorted to. They certainly spoke about this in detail to those who approached them[Such as disciples and students.]. O Partha! The man
who does not know about these decrees and about the determination of what should be done and what should not
be done, is certainly confounded. You are acting in that foolish way. It is always difficult to clearly know what
should be done and what should not be done. Everything can be known through the sacred texts, but you are not
acquainted with them. Based on your ignorance, you think that you are following dharma and that you are acting in
accordance with dharma. O Partha! You say that you are for dharma. But you do not understand that the killing of
a living being is a sin. O son[The word used is tata. Though it means son, it is affectionately used towards anyone who is junior or younger.]! Not killing living beings is the best course of action. That is my view. One can
utter a falsehood, but one should never indulge in violence. The king, your eldest brother, is knowledgeable about
dharma. How can you, like an ordinary man, kill that best of men? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It has
been said that one must not kill someone who is not fighting, someone who is without weapons, someone who is
reluctant to fight, someone who is running away, someone who has sought sanctuary and someone who has joined
his hands in salutation. The learned do not approve of killing such people. O Partha! In earlier times, you took that
vow of yours when you were a child. Because of that, you now wish to undertake an act that is full of adharma. O
Partha! How can you rush to kill your superior? Remember dharma. The course of dharma needs to be reflected
about. It is subtle and difficult to follow. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I will tell you about the mysteries of
dharma. Bhishma told you about this and so did Yudhishthira, who knows about dharma, kshatta Vidura and the
illustrious Kunti. O Dhananjaya! I will tell you about the details. Listen. One who speaks the truth is virtuous.
There is nothing superior to truth. However, it is extremely difficult to understand how one should base oneself on
truth. Sometimes, truth should not be spoken. And sometimes, a lie should be spoken. When all one's possessions
are being robbed, one should utter a lie. One should also utter a lie when one's life is in danger, or at the time of a
marriage. Those are the times when falsehood becomes truth and truth becomes falsehood. A person who is always
based on truth is but a child. A person who can differentiate between truth and falsehood can alone follow dharma.
Isn't it wonderful that a man can become wise even after performing an extremely terrible deed? Like Balaka, he
can obtain great merits, even though he has killed a blind being. And even though one strives for great virtue, one
may commit a great sin, like Koushika, who lived along rivers.'

' "Arjuna said, 'O illustrious one! So that I may gain knowledge, tell me about these accounts, about Balaka and
his connection with a blind being, and about Koushika, who lived near rivers.'

' "Krishna replied, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Balaka was a person who hunted animals. He went to
kill animals for his son and his wife, not to satisfy any desire. He looked after his blind mother and father and other
dependents. He was always devoted to his own dharma. He was always truthful and not malicious. One day,
though he made a lot of effort to search for animals, he could find none. Finally, he saw a carnivorous beast drinking water, using smell for its sight[That is, the animal was blind.]. Though he had not seen such an animal before, he killed it. Immediately, a
shower of flowers fell down from the sky. Apsaras began to sing and charming musical instruments were sounded.
Celestial vehicles descended from heaven, to take that hunter of animals away. O Arjuna! Because of its austerities, that animal had been granted a boon by the self-creating one[Brahma.] that it would be able to kill all beings, but
would be blind. He killed the beast that had made up its mind to kill all beings. That is the reason Balaka went to
heaven. The dharma of the gods is extremely difficult to comprehend. There was a brahmana named Koushika. He
was an ascetic and extremely learned. He lived at a confluence of rivers, far away from villages. He had taken a
vow that he would always speak the truth. O Dhananjaya! Because he always spoke the truth, he became famous.
At that time, scared of robbers, some people entered the forest. The cruel robbers made every effort to follow in
their footsteps. They approached Koushika, who always spoke the truth, and asked, "O illustrious one! There were
many people. What path have they taken? You are being asked in the name of truth. If you know, tell us." Having
been asked, Koushika spoke to them truthfully. "This forest has many trees, creepers and lantanas and they have
entered it." Those cruel men sought them out and killed them. So it has been heard. Koushika committed great adharma by speaking what should not have been said. He suffered great hardships in hell, because he did not know
about the subtleties of dharma. He was just like a foolish person who does not possess a great deal of learning and
does not ask the elders about the divisions of dharma, so that his great confusion can be resolved. Such indeed are
the signs and indications. Supreme knowledge is extremely difficult and some try to obtain it through arguments.
There are many other people who hold that dharma is only what is in the sacred texts. I will not contradict this, but
everything is not laid down there. The words of dharma have been laid down for the propagation of beings. Dharma is so called because it holds everything up[This is the etymological meaning of dharma, from the root dhri, meaning to hold up.]. Dharma upholds beings. Whatever has this property of holding
up is certainly dharma. There are those who wish that it should be otherwise. For those who desire otherwise, free
yourself from them, without speaking a lot. There is no need to speak to them. If you have to speak to them, or if
they are suspicious if you do not speak to them, it is better to utter a falsehood. That will be like speaking the truth.
When life is in danger, at the time of marriage, when the entire lineage or all the riches are about to be destroyed
and at the time of amusements, it is better to utter a lie. Those who know about the true nature of dharma do not
see any adharma there. When one takes an oath to free oneself from an association with robbers, it is better to utter
a lie. That is like speaking the truth. If one can, one should never give up one's riches to them. If one gives riches
to the wicked, it is the giver that is afflicted. Therefore, a falsehood uttered for the sake of dharma does not amount
to speaking a lie. These are the signs and indications and I have instructed you about them properly. O Partha!
Having heard this, tell me if Yudhishthira should be killed.'

' "Arjuna said, 'You have spoken like an immensely wise one! You have spoken like an immensely intelligent
one. Your words are those that will ensure our welfare. You are like our mother. You are like our father. O Krishna!
You are our supreme refuge and these words have been spoken by you. There is nothing in the three worlds that is
not known to you. You also know everything about supreme dharma. I think that Pandava Dharmaraja Yudhishthira cannot be killed. At this point in time, please tell me what I should do. Listen also to something else that is going on in my mind. O Dasharha! O Keshava! My vow is known to you. If there is any man who tells me, "O
Partha! Give your Gandiva to someone else who is superior to you in weapons," I must kill him. Bhima also said
he would kill anyone who called him an eunuch. O lion among the Vrishni lineage! In your presence, the king has
asked me to hand over my bow. O Keshava! If I kill him, I will not be able to remain in the world of the living
even for a short instant. O best among those in the world! O best among those who uphold dharma! O Krishna!
Tell me how my pledge remains true and yet, Pandava remains alive. Provide me with the appropriate counsel.'

' "Vasudeva replied, 'The king was exhausted. In particular, in the battle, he was wounded by the large numbers
of sharp arrows that Karna shot at him. O Partha! That is the reason he spoke harsh words to you. Karna is the
stake in the battle today[The image is that of a gambling match.]. If he is slain, the Kurus will be vanquished. That is what the king, Dharma's son,
thought. When a person suffers great shame, it is said, that though alive, such a person is dead. You have always
honoured the king, together with Bhima and the twins, and so have the foremost and aged men in this world. You
should offer him a trifling insult. O Partha! Address the king as "tvam[In English, 'tvam' and 'bhavan' will both be translated as you. But 'tvam' is used for someone younger, equal
or junior. 'Bhavan' connotes greater honour and is used towards someone who is older or senior. So far, Arjuna
has addressed Yudhishthira as 'bhavan'. 'Tvam' will be an insult.]". O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Having been thus addressed, a senior will be as good as dead. O Kounteya! Act in this way towards Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Adopt this path of adharma. This supreme learning has been laid
down in the sacred texts of Atharva and Angiras[Famous sages.]. Men must always follow this superior course, without thinking about it. O Pandava! Having been addressed by you as "tvam", Dharmaraja will think that he has been killed.
You can later worship his feet and speak soft and conciliatory words to Partha[Yudhishthira. Both Yudhishthira and Arjuna are Partha, Pritha's son.]. The Pandaveya king, your
brother, is wise and will never be angered. O Partha! You will be freed from uttering a falsehood and will not have
to kill your brother. You can then cheerfully slay Karna, the son of a suta.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having been thus addressed by Janardana, Partha applauded what his well-wisher had told him.
And Arjuna used harsh words towards Dharmaraja, the likes of which he had never spoken earlier. 'O king!
You[In Sanskrit, 'tvam', that being the point.] should not censure me about having withdrawn, since you have yourself been stationed more than one
krosha away from the battle. You should not censure Bhima either. He is fighting with the foremost of the warriors.
At this time, he has been afflicted by the enemies in the battle and has slain brave kings. He has killed more than
one thousand elephants, emitting fierce roars like a lion. The brave one has performed an extremely difficult deed.
You['Tvam' again.] have never done anything like this. He has jumped down from his chariot. With a supreme club, he has
slaughtered horses, men and elephants in the battle. Using his supreme sword and broken parts of chariots and his
bow, he destroyed horses, chariots, steeds[The text has the word horses twice.] and elephants belonging to the enemy. Then again, intolerant and
brave, he struck and killed with his feet and his hands. He is immensely strong and like Vaishravana[Kubera.] and Yama.
He slew the enemy, as only he can. That Bhimasena has the right to censure me, but not you, who have always
been protected by your well-wishers. Bhima is single-handedly agitating the sons of Dhritarashtra, their maharathas, elephants and the best of horses. That scorcher of enemies has the right to reprimand me. He is killing
large numbers of the enemy, Kalingas, Vangas, Angas, Nishadas, Magadhas and is always as angry as a dark-blue
cloud. He is like an elephant and has the right to speak to me. At the right time, he is riding on his chariot and
brandishing his bow, with his fists full of arrows. The brave one is releasing a shower of arrows in the great battle,
like a torrent of rain from a cloud. The learned say that speech is the strength of the best of brahmanas and strength
of arms that of kshatriyas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are cruel and your strength is in speech. You
think that I am also like you. I have always sought to act for your benefit, with my wives, sons and with my own
life and soul. And you have struck a person like me with the arrows of your words. Therefore, we will never be
able to obtain any happiness from you. I have killed maharathas for your sake. But you lie down on Droupadi's
bed and slight me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are suspicious and cruel. Therefore, we will never be
able to know any happiness through you. O lord among men! He[Bhishma.] was always devoted to the truth and in the
battle, for the sake of your welfare, himself told you about the means of his death. Protected by me, Drupada's
great-souled and brave son, Shikhandi, killed him. Since you are addicted to the vice of gambling, I am not delighted at the prospect of your winning back the kingdom. There are many sins associated with gambling and it is
against dharma. You heard Sahadeva recount them[It is not obvious why Sahadeva is being singled out.]. But you have always been addicted to that practice of
wicked ones and that is the reason all of us have been reduced to this hardship. O Indra among kings! It was because of your gambling that the kingdom was lost and our difficulties are due to you. O king! O unfortunate one!
Therefore, do not anger us by using these cruel words against us again.' Savyasachi, who was firm in his wisdom,
made him listen to these harsh words. But the son of the king of the gods repented this and sighed repeatedly, unsheathing his sword.

' "On seeing this, Krishna asked, 'Why have you unsheathed your sword, which sparkles like the sky, again?
Tell me truthfully and I will give you an answer. I will tell you how you can accomplish your objective.' Having
been thus asked by the supreme of men, he was extremely distressed and spoke these words to Keshava. 'I will kill
myself, because I have acted in a wicked way[Because Arjuna has spoken harsh words to Yudhishthira.].' In an attempt to pacify Partha, the best among the upholders of
dharma spoke these words to Dhananjaya. 'O Partha! Tell him about your own qualities now. Thereby, you will
kill yourself today[Because self-praise is like killing one's own self.].' Dhananjaya, Shakra's son, approved of Krishna's words and, lowering his bow, spoke
these words to Yudhishthira, supreme among those who uphold dharma. 'O king! O god among men! Listen. There
is no other archer who is my equal, except the god who wields Pinaka[Shiva. Pinaka is the name of Shiva's bow or trident.]. I am revered even by that great-souled
one. In an instant, I can destroy the universe, with its mobile and immobile objects. O king! It is I who vanquished
all the directions and the kings there and brought them under your subjugation. The rajasuya sacrifice that you
completed, with donations, and the divine assembly hall that you obtained, were because of my infinite energy[The conquest, sacrifice and coronation, described in Sections 23 and 24 (Volume 2).].
The arrows have left marks on my palms, when I affixed arrows to the bow in battle. The soles of my feet bear the
marks of arrows and a standard[Arjuna was born with these signs.]. That is the reason someone like me cannot be defeated in a battle. I have slain
those from the north. I have killed those from the west. I have restrained those from the east. I have destroyed
those from the south. There are only a few of the samshaptakas who remain. I have destroyed half of the entire
army. O king! The soldiers of the Bharatas, with an army like that of the gods, have been slain by me and are lying
down. I will use weapons to kill only those who know about weapons. That is the reason I have not reduced the
world to ashes.' Having said this, Partha again spoke to Yudhishthira, supreme among the upholders of dharma. 'O
king! Know this. Today, Radha[Radha, wife of the suta Adhiratha, reared Karna. Thus, Radha was Karna's mother.] will lose her son, or Kunti will lose me. O king! Be pacified and pardon the the
words that I have spoken. In due course, you will understand what I have told you[Once Arjuna has killed Karna.].' The foremost one pacified
the king, who was capable of withstanding all enemies. He stood there, and then again spoke these words. 'I will
wholeheartedly try to kill the son of a suta and extricate Bhima from the battle. O king! My life is devoted to ensuring your pleasure. Know that this is the truth.' Having said this, Kiriti, blazing in his energy, touched his feet
and then stood up and said, 'All this will come to pass very quickly and I will then return to you.'

' "On hearing the harsh words of his brother, Phalguna, Dharmaraja Pandava raised himself[He was lying down on a bed.] and with his
heart filled with misery, spoke these words to Partha. 'O Partha! I have not acted in a way that virtuous ones do.
That is the reason we are confronted with this extremely terrible calamity. Therefore, sever my head today. I am
the worst of men and the exterminator of my lineage. I am wicked and addicted to evil. I am stupid in my intelligence. I am lazy and a coward. I am a man who disrespects those who are superior. What is the point of following
a harsh one like me for a long time? I am wicked and I will retire to the forest today. Without an inferior one like
me, let all of you be happy. The great-souled Bhimasena is fit to be a king. What will a eunuch like me do with a
kingdom? I am incapable of again listening to such harsh words, spoken by you in anger. Let Bhima be the king. O
brave one! Having been insulted, what is the purpose of my remaining alive?' Having said this, the king suddenly
arose from his bed and prepared to leave for the forest. Vasudeva bowed down to him and said, 'O king! You know
that the wielder of Gandiva is devoted to the truth and is famous for Gandiva. Any man in the world who asks him
to give Gandiva to another, will be slain by him and lose his body. You spoke such words to him. O lord of the
earth! Wishing to preserve the truth of Partha's pledge, I asked him to show disrespect towards you. It is said that
disrespect towards one's seniors is equivalent to death. O mighty-armed one! O king! I asked him to cross you and
you should pardon both Partha and me. O great king! Both of us are seeking refuge with you. O king! We are bowing in obeisance before you and you should pardon us. Today, the earth will drink the blood of the wicked Rad-
heya. I know this to be the truth. Today, the son of a suta will be slain. Today, the one whose death you desire will
pass beyond his span of life.' Having heard Krishna's words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira respectfully raised
Hrishikesha and joining his hands in salutation, affectionately spoke these words. 'It is exactly as you have said. I
have been guilty of a transgression. O Govinda! I have been taught by you. O Madhava! I have been saved by you.
O Achyuta! Today, we have been saved by you from a terrible calamity and fear. We were immersed in an ocean of
hardship and you have been our protector. We were confused by our terrible ignorance today and have crossed it.
Both[Yudhishthira and Arjuna.] of us were submerged in an ocean of grief and sorrow and your intelligence has been the raft. O Achyuta!
We have an adviser. We have a protector and we have crossed it.'" '
