Vaishampayana said, 'Shakra arrived before Partha on a chariot, making all of heaven and earth echo with the
roar, and asked him to ascend. On seeing that his brothers had fallen down, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was overcome by grief and spoke these words to the one with the one thousand eyes. "My brothers have fallen down here.
Let them come with me. O lord of the gods! Without my brothers, I do not desire to go to heaven. O Purandara!
The princess was delicate and deserved happiness. Let her come with us. You should grant us this permission."

'Indra replied, "You will see your brothers and sons, together with Krishna and all the others. They have gone to
heaven, ahead of you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Do not grieve. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They
have cast aside their human bodies and have gone there. However, there is no doubt that you will go to heaven in
this body."

'Yudhishthira said, "O lord of the past and the present! This dog has always been devoted to me. He should go
with me. Because of compassion, that is my view."

'Indra replied, "O king! You will now obtain immortality, prosperity like mine, all kinds of great fame and the
happiness of heaven. Abandon the dog. There is no lack of compassion in this."

'Yudhishthira said, "O one with one thousand eyes! How can a person who is noble perform an ignoble act? O
noble one! That is exceedingly difficult to do. I do not want a prosperity that comes about by abandoning those
who are devoted to me."

'Indra replied, "For those with dogs, there is no place in the world of heaven. Krodhavasha takes away their
beneficial and good deeds[Literally, krodhavasha means someone who is prone to anger. Krodavasha was one of Daksha's daughters, married to the sage Kashyapa. Krodhavasha's descendants are sometimes described as deities,
sometimes as semi-divine and sometimes as other species.]. O Dharmaraja! You should think about this. Abandon this dog. There is no lack of
compassion in this."

'Yudhishthira said, "It is said that there is great sin in abandoning one who is devoted. In this world, this is equal
to the killing of a brahmana. O great Indra! Ever since I have been born, I have patiently done that. Therefore, for
the sake of my own happiness, how can I act in a contrary way now?"

'Indra replied, "If gifts laid out for a sacrifice, or oblations poured into it, are seen by a dog, Krodhavasha takes
the benefits away. Therefore, you should abandon this dog. If you abandon this dog, you will obtain the world of
the gods. O brave one! Having abandoned your brothers and your beloved Krishna, you will obtain that world
through your deeds. When you have given all of them up, why are you not ready to abandon the dog? Why are you
confused?"

'Yudhishthira said, "In the world of mortals, there is no friendship or enmity with those who are dead. I am incapable of reviving them. That is the reason I abandoned those who are no longer alive. O Shakra! It is my view that
surrendering someone who was sought sanctuary, killing a woman, stealing the possessions of a brahmana and enmity towards a friend-these four are equal to the sin of abandoning someone who is devoted."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing Dharmaraja's words, the illustrious one, who was in the form of Dharma, was
pleased[The dog changed into Dharma, Dharma having assumed the form of a dog.]. He gently spoke these words, which were full of praise, to Yudhishthira, Indra among men. "O  Indra
among kings! You have been born in a noble lineage. You follow your father's conduct and possess intelligence. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! You possess compassion towards all beings. O son! On an earlier occasion, I
had tested you in Dvaitavana[This incident has been described in Section 44 (Volume 3).]. Desiring to fetch some water, your valiant brothers were slain. Forgetting about
your brothers Bhima and Arjuna and showing equality between your mothers[Kunti and Madri.
 
 ], you desired that Nakula should be
brought back to life. Now, instead of giving up the devoted dog, you have decided to forsake the chariot of the
gods. O lord of men! Therefore, there is no one in heaven who is your equal. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Therefore, in your own body, you will obtain the eternal worlds. O best among the Bharata lineage! You will obtain a divine and supreme objective." Dharma, Shakra, the Maruts, the Ashvins, the gods and the devarshis made
Pandava ascend the chariot. The siddhas, who could roam around at will, left on their own celestial vehicles. They
were sacred and radiant, auspicious in words, intelligence and deeds. The king, the extender of the Kuru lineage,
climbed onto the chariot, which ascended swiftly, covering heaven and earth with its energy.

'Narada was great in austerities and knew about all the worlds. He was great with words. From amidst those
gods, he spoke these words. "There are rajarshis who have assembled here. However, the king of the Kurus has
surpassed all their deeds with his own. He has enveloped the worlds with his fame, energy, conduct and prosperity
and has gone there in his own body. We have not heard of anyone other than Pandava who has accomplished that."

Hearing Narada's words, the king, with dharma in his soul, spoke these words, after honouring the gods and the
kings who were alongside. "My brothers have obtained a good state or a bad one. Those are the worlds that I also
wish to go to." Hearing these words, Purandara, king of the gods, was filled with compassion and replied to Yudhishthira. "O Indra among kings! Dwell in this place. You have conquered it through your auspicious deeds. Why
are you attached to human affection still? You have obtained supreme success and no other man has obtained it. O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! Your brothers are incapable of obtaining that region. O lord of men! You are still
touched by human sentiments. Behold heaven and the abodes of the gods, frequented by devarshis and siddhas."

Yet again, Yudhishthira spoke these words to the lord who was the Indra of the gods. "O slayer of daityas! Without
them, I am not interested in anything. I wish to go to the place where my brothers have gone. I wish to go where
Droupadi, best among women and my beloved, is. She possessed the qualities of spirit and intelligence. She was
buxom and dark."'

This ends Maha-Prasthanika Parva.