Sanjaya said, "That battle, destructive of men, horses and elephants, continued. O king! Shakuni Soubala attacked
Sahadeva. As he swiftly attacked, the powerful Sahadeva shot a torrent of arrows that were like swift insects. In
the encounter, Uluka pierced Bhima with ten arrows. O great king! Shakuni pierced Bhima with three arrows and
enveloped Sahadeva with ninety. O king! In the battle, those brave ones clashed against each other and pierced
each other with sharp arrows that were tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. They were gold-tufted and
sharpened on stone. O lord of the earth! Those showers of arrows were released from the bows in their hands.
They covered the ten directions, like rain pouring down from clouds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the
battle, the enraged and extremely powerful Bhima and Sahadeva roamed around in the encounter and created great
carnage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those two shrouded your army with hundreds of arrows. Here and
there, the sky became covered with darkness. O lord of the earth! Mangled by the arrows, the horses fled in a reverse direction and dragged around many slain ones in their paths. Horses and horse riders were killed. O venerable one! Armour was shattered and javelins were destroyed. The earth seemed to be strewn with coloured flowers.
O great king! The warriors there clashed against each other. They angrily roamed around in the battle, slaying each
other. The earth was strewn with beautiful heads that had the complexion of lotus filaments. The eyes were turned
up and the lower lips were bit in anger. They were adorned with earrings. O great king! Arms that were like the
trunks of kings of elephants were severed. They were adorned with armlets and arm-guards and still wielded
swords, javelins and battleaxes. Other bleeding and headless torsos seemed to rise up and dance around on the field
of battle. O lord! The earth was frequented by a large number of carnivorous beasts and it was terrible. In the great
battle, only a few of the Kouraveya soldiers were left. Having conveyed them to Yama's abode, the Pandavas were
delighted.

' "At that time, the brave and powerful Soubala severely struck Sahadeva on the head with a javelin. O great
king! Losing his senses, he sank down on the floor of his chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing
Sahadeva in that state, the powerful Bhimasena angrily restrained all the soldiers. He pierced hundreds and thousands with his iron arrows. Having pierced them, the scorcher of enemies roared like a lion. At that sound, all of
Shakuni's followers were terrified and quickly fled in fear, together with their horses and elephants. On seeing that
they had been routed, King Duryodhana said, 'O wicked ones! O those who do not know about dharma! Why are
you running away from the battle? Deeds performed in this world by brave ones who give up their lives in the battle and do not show their backs, earn worlds in the hereafter.' Having been thus addressed, King Soubala's followers attacked the Pandavas, preferring death over retreat. O Indra among kings! As they advanced, they created an
extremely terrible noise. All of them were agitated, like a turbulent ocean. O great king! On seeing that Soubala's
followers were attacking, in their pursuit of victory, the Pandavas counter-attacked.

' "O lord of the earth! Having regained his assurance, the invincible Sahadeva pierced Shakuni with ten arrows
and his horses with three. He seemed to smile as he severed Soubala's bow with his arrows. Shakuni, unassailable
in battle, picked up another bow. He pierced Nakula with sixty arrows and Bhimasena with seven. O great king!
Uluka also pierced Bhima with seven arrows. Wishing to save his father in the battle, he pierced Sahadeva with
seventy. In the encounter, Bhimasena pierced Shakuni with sixty-four sharp arrows and those who were along the
flanks with three arrows each. In the battle, having been struck by Bhima with arrows washed in oil, he[Uluka.] angrily
covered Sahadeva with a shower of arrows. It was like clouds tinged with lightning pouring down rain on a mountain. O great king! The brave and powerful Sahadeva used a broad-headed arrow to sever and bring down Uluka's
head. He was slain by Sahadeva and fell down from his chariot onto the ground. His limbs were covered with
blood and the Pandava warriors were delighted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that his son had
been killed there, Shakuni's voice choked with tears. He remembered Kshatta's words and sighed. Having thought
for some time, with his eyes full of tears, he sighed and, approaching Sahadeva, he pierced him with three arrows.
O great king! Countering the large number of arrows with his own arrows, the powerful Sahadeva severed his bow
in the battle. O Indra among kings! When his bow was severed, Shakuni Soubala grasped a large sword and hurled
it towards Sahadeva. O lord of the earth! It descended violently, terrible in form. But smilingly, he[Sahadeva.] severed
Soubala's sword into two fragments in the encounter. When the sword was shattered into two fragments, he
grasped a mighty club and hurled it towards Sahadeva. Though invincible, it too fell down on the ground. The angry Soubala then hurled an extremely terrible javelin towards Pandava. It was like the night of destruction. It descended violently in the encounter. However, Sahadeva seemed to smile. He used gold-decorated arrows to slice it
into three fragments. Shattered into three fragments and decorated with gold, it fell down on the ground. It was as
if blazing thunder had fallen from the sky, with flashes of lightning. On seing that the javelin had been destroyed,
Soubala was overcome with fear. Because of their fright, all those on your side fled, and this included Soubala. The
Pandavas, hoping for victory, roared loudly in delight. Almost all those on the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra retreated. On seeing that they were distressed, Madri's powerful son[Sahadeva.] restrained them with thousands of arrows in
the battle.

' "Sahadeva approached Soubala from the rear. He was still hoping for victory, though he was running away
from the battle and was protected by those from Gandhara. O king! He remembered that Shakuni, his share, was
still left[Shakuni was the share allotted to Sahadeva.]. Sahadeva pursued him on a chariot that was decorated with gold. He strung his large bow and repeatedly twanged it. He pursued Soubala and struck him with arrows that had been sharpened on stone and shafted with
feathers of vultures. In rage, he struck him severely, like a mighty elephant being struck with a goad. Having struck
him, the intelligent one addressed him, as if reminding him. 'Resort to the dharma of kshatriyas. Be a man and
fight. O stupid one! You rejoiced a lot in the assembly hall. O evil-minded one! You will receive the fruits of that
action now. All the evil-souled ones who disrespected us in earlier times have been killed. Duryodhana, who
brings ill fame to his lineage, is the only one that is left, and his maternal uncle[Shakuni.]. I will slay you and slice off your
head with a razor-sharp arrow today. It will be like plucking fruit from a tree with a stick.' O great king! O tiger
among men! Having said this, the immensely strong Sahadeva attacked him with great force. The invincible Sahadeva, the lord of warriors, attacked him. He seemed to be smiling, as he stretched his bow with great force and
rage. He pierced Shakuni with ten arrows and his horses with four. He severed his umbrella, standard and bow and
roared like a lion. Soubala's standard, bow and umbrella were severed by Sahadeva and he was pierced in all his
inner organs by many arrows. O great king! Then, the powerful Sahadeva again shot a shower of invincible arrows
towards Shakuni. Angrily, Subala's son rushed towards Madri's son, Sahadeva. He wished to kill him with a
javelin that was decorated with gold. In the forefront of that battle, as he rushed swiftly ahead, Madri's son severed
the upraised javelin and the two well-rounded arms with three broad-headed arrows. Having spiritedly severed
them, he roared. Acting swiftly, he then used a broad-headed arrow that was gold-tufted and was capable of penetrating all armour. It was firm and was made out of iron. Aiming this well and with force, he severed his head from
his body. That arrow was decorated with gold. It was extremely sharp and was as radiant as the sun. In the battle,
Pandava used that to sever the head of Subala's son and he fell down on the ground. The arrow was gold-tufted
and had been sharpened on stone and Pandu's enraged son powerfully severed the head with this. He[Shakuni.] was the
root of all the bad conduct of the Kurus. With the head severed, Shakuni was seen to lie down on the ground. His
body was wet with blood.

' "The warriors on your side were dispirited and terrified. Still wielding weapons, they fled in different directions. Their mouths were dry and they ran away, bereft of their senses. They were afflicted by the twang of Gandi-
va. They were oppressed by fear. Together with the son of Dhritarashtra, the chariots, horses and elephants were
routed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Shakuni was brought down, the Pandaveyas were delighted. In
the battle, they cheerfully blew on their conch shells. Together with Keshava, the soldiers rejoiced. All of them honoured the energetic Sahadeva and joyfully said, 'O brave one! It is through good fortune that the evil-souled gambler and his son have been killed by you in the battle.'" '
