'Markandeya said, "While Rama was seated there with them, on Sugriva's instructions, the foremost among the
monkeys began to assemble there. Surrounded by one thousand crores of swift monkeys, Sushena, Vali's illustrious father-in-law, came to Rama. Surrounded by one crore of monkeys, Gaja and Gavaya, the immensely valorous
Indras among monkeys, separately made their appearance. O great king! Gavaksha was terrible to look at and had
the tail of a cow. He arrived with sixty thousand crore. The famous Gandhamadana lived in Gandhamadana. He
brought one thousand crore of awesome monkeys. The intelligent monkey, Panasa, was immensely strong. He
brought ten, twelve and thirty-five crore. The brave and aged monkey, by the name of Dadhimukha, was illustrious. He brought a great army of monkeys that were awesome in energy. Jambavan brought a hundred thousand
crore of bears. They were dark and terrible in their deeds. Their foreheads were lined. There were many other leaders of herds of monkeys. O great king! Innumerable numbers assembled for the sake of Rama. They roared like lions, with the complexion of shirisha blossoms. As they ran around, a tumultuous sound was heard. Some were like
the peaks of mountains. Others were like buffaloes. Some were like clouds in autumn. Others had faces that were
like vermilion. The monkeys jumped up and fell down. They leapt up and raised dust. Monkeys arrived from all
the directions. The large army of monkeys was like the ocean when it is full. On Sugriva's instructions, they set up
their residences there. When all the Indras among monkeys had assembled from all the directions, when the lunar
day was auspicious and so was the nakshatra, the illustrious Raghava marched out with Sugriva at the appointed
hour. As if to shatter the world, the army was arranged in battle formations. Hanuman, the son of the wind-god,
was in the front of the army. Soumitri, who was without any fear, protected the rear. The two Raghavas, with
guards for the arms and the fingers, and surrounded by those foremost among monkeys, looked like the sun and the
moon amidst the planets. That army of monkeys was armed with shala and tala trees and rocks as weapons. It
looked like an extensive field of rice at the time of sunrise.

'"Protected by Nala, Nila, Angada, Kratha, Mainda and Dvivida, the extremely large army marched, for the sake
of accomplishing Raghava's objective. Without any obstructions, it duly passed through extensive areas with a lot
of roots and fruit, with an abundance of honey and meat and full of pure water and camped on the ridges of mountains. That army of monkeys then arrived at the salty ocean. That force, with its many pennants, looked like a second ocean. It went to the forest along the shore and began to reside there. Then, in the midst of the chiefs among
the monkeys, Dasharatha's illustrious son told Sugriva words that were appropriate for the occasion. 'What do you
think is the way to cross over the ocean? This army is large and the ocean is difficult to cross.' Some monkeys,
who thought of themselves as learned, thought that the monkeys were capable of jumping over the ocean. Others
thought of boats and other means of crossing. But having comforted all of them, Rama replied, 'No. O brave ones!
All the monkeys are not capable of leaping over this expanse of one hundred yojanas. Therefore, this cannot be a
firm view. There are not enough boats to bear this army. Besides, the interests of trade should not suffer because of
us. Our army is vast and the enemy will look for weak spots[The enemy will find it easier to attack if the force is divided.]. The idea of leaping, or using boats, does not appeal to me. No. I will attack this treasure of water through some means and the one who lives below[Varuna, the lord of the waters.] will then
show me a way. If he does not show me a path, I will burn him up with great and unassailable weapons that flame
with the fire and the wind.' Having said this, Raghava, together with Soumitri, touched the water, and basing themselves on an expanse of kusha grass, repulsed the ocean. Then the god of the ocean, the illustrious lord of male and
female rivers, showed himself in a dream to Raghava, surrounded by masses of aquatic creatures. Surrounded by
hundreds of stores of gems, he addressed him in sweet words. 'O son of Kousalya! O bull among men! Tell me
what I can do to help you.' Rama told him, 'I am of the Ikshvaku lineage and can therefore be regarded as your relative[Ikshvaku was the son of Manu and Manu was the son of the sun-god. As sons of Aditi, the sun-god and
Varuna are brothers.]. O lord of the male and female rivers! I desire that you show me a path for my army, so that I can go and
kill Dashagriva, the wretch of the Poulastya lineage. If you do not give me the path that I am asking for, I will dry
you up with arrows that have been invoked with mantras to make them celestial weapons.' On hearing Rama's
words, Varuna's abode[The ocean.] was extremely aggrieved and stood there, hands joined in salutation. It spoke these
words. 'I do not wish to obstruct you, or create any obstacles. O Rama! Listen to my words. Having heard, decide
on your course of action. If I grant a passage for your marching army at your request, others will use the strength
of their bows to also command me. There is a monkey named Nala who is venerated by the artisans. He is the
powerful son of the god Vishvakarma Tvashtra[The architect of the gods.]. I will bear whatever he throws into me-wood, straw or stone,
and that will become a bridge.' Having said this, he disappeared.

'"Rama told Nala, 'Build a bridge across the ocean. It is my view that you are capable of doing this.' Through
this means, Kakutstha had a bridge constructed. It was ten yojanas wide and a hundred yojanas long. Even today,
that is famous on earth as Nala's bridge. It was created on Rama's instructions and is established like a mountain.
Vibhishana, the brother of the Indra of the rakshasas and with dharma in his soul, met Rama there, with his advisers, and the great-souled one welcomed him. Sugriva had his misgivings that he might be a spy. But Raghava satisfied himself about the truth through his actions, gestures and conduct and showed him the honours. He instated
Vibhishana as the king of all the rakshasas and made him Lakshmana's adviser and well-wisher. O lord of men! In
accordance with Vibhishana's instructions, within a month, he, together with his army, crossed the ocean over the
bridge. Then, having reached Lanka, he caused its many and large gardens to be ravaged by the monkeys. Ravana
had two rakshasa advisers named Shuka and Sarana. They disguised themselves as monkeys and came as spies, but
Vibhishana had them caught. When those roamers of the night revealed their real forms of rakshasas, Rama had
then shown to his army. Later, he let them go. Having set up the quarters for his army in a grove in the city, the
brave one sent the wise monkey Angada as his messenger to Ravana."'
