'Lomasha said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having heard these words from the sky, the king, supreme
among kings, respectfully acted as he had been asked to. O king! Sixty thousand sons were born to the rajarshi
through Rudra's grace. They were terrible, the performers of cruel deeds and could travel around in the sky. Since
they were many in number, they oppressed all the worlds, even the immortals. Addicted to fighting, they oppressed
the thirty gods, the gandharvas, the rakshasas and all other beings. Slaughtered by the evil-minded sons of Sagara,
together with all the gods, the worlds sought refuge with Brahma. The immensely fortunate grandfather of all the
worlds told them, 'O thirty gods! With all the worlds, go back to where you came from. Within a short space of
time, a great destruction of the sons of Sagara will occur. O gods! Their own great and terrible deeds will bring this
on them.' O lord of men! Having been thus addressed, the gods and the worlds took the grandfather's leave and
returned to where they had come from.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! Many days passed. The valorous King Sagara instated himself for a horse
sacrifice. Protected by his sons, his horse roamed the earth and reached the terrible-looking and waterless ocean.
Though they sought to protect it with care, it disappeared there. O son! Then Sagara's sons thought that the
supreme horse had been abducted. Returing to their father, they told him that the horse had disappeared and had
been abducted. He told them, 'All of you go and search for the horse in all the directions.' O great king! On their
father's instructions, they looked for the horse in all the directions, in places where there were no paths and everywhere, even in the bottom of the earth. Then all of Sagara's sons assembled together, but could not find the horse
or the person who had abducted the horse. They returned to their father, and joining their hands in salutation, said,
'O king! On the king's command, we have searched the entire earth, with its oceans, forests, islands, female rivers,
male rivers, caves, mountains and wooded regions. O king! But we have not been able to find the horse, nor the
person who has abducted the horse.' Having heard their words, the king was angered and lost his senses. O king!
Driven by destiny, he spoke these words to all of them. 'O sons! Go away and do not return. Look for the horse in
each direction. Do not return without the sacrificial horse.' Accepting the command, Sagara's sons began to search
the earth once again.

'"Then the brave ones saw a yawning hole in the earth. Sagara's sons entered the hole and began to dig there.
With spades and axes, they dug up the bed of the ocean. Being thus dug by the combined efforts of Sagara's sons,
Varuna's abode was ripped apart on all sides and suffered extreme pain. Asuras, nagas, rakshasas and diverse other
beings were killed by Sagara's sons and screamed in pain. Hundreds and thousands of living beings were seen with
severed heads, without torsos and with their thighs, bones and heads shattered. Thus, they continued to dig in the
ocean, the abode of crocodiles[Makara is a mythical creature and can also be translated as a shark.]. A great deal of time passed, but the horse could still not be seen. O lord of the
earth! In their anger, Sagara's sons then dug the ocean in the north-eastern direction, until they reached the nether
regions[Patala. There are actually seven nether regions-atala, vitala, sutala, rasatala, talatala, mahatala and pata-
la. Thus patala is the lowest of the seven nether regions.]. They saw the horse roaming around on the surface of the ground there and the great-souled Kapila,
unsurpassed in a mass of energy and radiant in austerities, like a flaming fire."'
