Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Krishna's words, full of dharma and artha, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, joined his
hands in salutation and spoke these words to him. "O lord of the worlds! O mighty-armed one! O Shiva! O
Narayana! O Achyuta! Having heard your words, I am flooded with delight. You are the lord of speech. What can I
say in your presence? Everything that can be said exists in your words. O god! Whatever has been done in this
world, what should be done, and what is being done, all emanate from you. The worlds are pervaded by your intelligence. In the presence of the king of the gods, who can speak about the world of the gods? Before you, only such
a person can talk about dharma, kama and artha in the sacred texts. O Madhusudana! My mind is suffering from
the wounds of these arrows. My limbs are weak and my intelligence is unclear. I lack the capacity to talk about
anything. O Govinda! These arrows are like poison and the fire and are oppressing me. My great strength is leaving. My breath of life is ebbing away. My inner organs are scorched. My consciousness is distracted. The weakness
is affecting my words. How can I be interested in speaking? O virtuous one! O descendant of the Dasharha lineage! Show me your favours. O mighty-armed one! Pardon me. O Achyuta! I will not say anything. In your presence, even Vachaspati[The lord of speech.] would refrain from speaking. I cannot distinguish the directions, nor the sky or the earth.
O Madhusudana! It is only because of your valour that I am still here. O lord! You should yourself quickly tell
Dharmaraja about what is beneficial. You are the learning that is there in all the sacred texts. You are the eternal
doer in the worlds. When you are present in the world, how can someone like me speak? That will be like a disciple before a preceptor."

'Vasudeva replied, "O one who has borne the great burden of the Kouravas! These words are worthy of you.
You are immensely valorous and are established in great spirits. You can see the purpose behind everything. O
Gangeya! You have spoken to me about the pain from the wounds of these storms of arrows. O Bhishma! O lord!
Through my favours, accept a boon from me. O Gangeya! You will not be affected by debility, unconsciousness,
fever, pain, hunger and thirst. O unblemished one! All knowledge will manifest itself before you. Your intelligence
will be clear and will not be distracted. O Bhishma! There will always be spirit in your mind. You will like the
king of the stars[The moon.], free of the clouds and without dusk and darkness. Whenever you think about dharma and
artha, your intelligence will back this up first. O tiger among kings! O infinitely valorous one! By resorting to your
divine sight, you will be able to see the four kinds of beings[Those born from wombs, those born from eggs, those born from seeds
and those born from sweat (moisture).] that have been created. O Bhishma! Through the
sight of knowledge, you will be able to see the truth about the four kinds of beings, like a fish in clear water."'

Vaishampayana said, 'With Vyasa, all the maharshis worshipped Krishna with hymns and words from the Rig
Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda. In every direction, a divine shower of flowers rained down from the sky
and fell down at the spot where Varshneya, Gangeya and the Pandavas were. Celestial instruments were sounded
and large numbers of apsaras arrived there. Nothing unpleasant was seen anywhere there. An auspicious and pleasant wind began to blow and it carried all the fragrant and sacred scents. The directions were calm and the animals
and the birds also became calm. In an instant, the illustrious sun god, with the one thousand rays, was seen in the
west, like a fire burning the extremity of a forest. All the maharshis arose and honoured Janardana, Bhishma and
King Yudhishthira. Keshava bowed before them, and so did the Pandavas, Satyaki, Sanjaya and Kripa Sharadvata.
When those who were always devoted to dharma[The sages.]were honoured in the proper way, they said, "We will return
tomorrow," and quickly left, as they wished. Keshava and the Pandavas took their leave of Gangeya. They circumambulated him and ascended their sparkling chariots. The poles of those chariots were decorated with gold and
ivory. There were crazy tuskers that looked like mountains. There were horses that were as swift as eagles. There
were foot soldiers with bows and arrows. Extremely fast, that army advanced in front and to the rear of those chariots. In front and to the rear, it was like the great river Narmada, separated into two by Mount Rikshavat[Narmada is believed to originate in Mount Rikshavat, in the Vindhyas.]. In the
east, the illustrious moon arose, delighting the army. The sun had drunk up the juice from the herbs and it again
restored their original qualities. The bulls among the Yadus and the Pandavas entered the city[Hastinapura.], which was as radiant as a city of the gods. They were exhausted and entered those supreme and appropriate abodes, like the lord of
deer[The lion.] returning to a cave.'
