'Markandeya said, "O king! When Ikshvaku died, Shashada became the king of Ayodhya and obtained the earth.
He had the greatest dharma in his soul. Shashada had a valorous son named Kakutstha. Kakutstha's son was Ane-
nas and Anenas's was Prithu. Prithu's son was Vishvagashva and Vishvagashva begot the wise Ardra. His son was
Yuvanashva and his son was Shravasta. King Shravasta built Shravasti[Shravasti or Sravasti is in Uttar Pradesh.]. Shravasta's son was the immensely
strong Brihadashva and Kuvalashva is known as Brihadashva's son. Kuvalashva had twenty-one thousand sons.
All of them were learned, powerful and unassailable. Kuvalashva surpassed his father in all the qualities. O great
king! In due course of time, Brihadashva instated the supremely brave Kuvalashva, who was always immersed in
dharma, in the kingdom. Having handed over the prosperity to his son, the wise king Brihadashva, the destroyer of
his enemies, went to a hermitage to practise austerities. O king! O Yudhishthira! Utanka, supreme among brahmanas, heard that rajarshi Brihadashva had left for the forest. Then the immensely energetic Utanka, limitless in
his soul, went to that supreme among men, foremost among those who were skilled in the use of all weapons. He
tried to restrain him.

'"Utanka said, 'O king! It is your duty to protect and you should perform that duty. It is through your favours
that we live without anxiety. O king! Protected by a great-souled one like you, we will be without anxiety. Therefore, you should not depart for the forest. Great dharma can be seen in protecting the subjects. That cannot be seen
in the forest. Therefore, give up such an inclination. O Indra among kings! There is no dharma that can be seen,
which is like protecting the subjects. This is what rajarshis have practised earlier. Protect the subjects, as they
should be protected by the king. O king! Else, I will not be able to perform my austerities without anxiety. There is
a desert region near my hermitage and there is an ocean of sand known by the name of Ujjanaka. It is many yo-
janas long and many yojanas wide. An extremely valorous, powerful and terrible Indra among the danavas dwells
there. He is the son of Madhu and Kaitabha and this extremely terrible one has the name of Dhundhu[Madhu and Kaitabha were demons killed by Vishnu.]. O king!
This infinitely valorous one lives under the ground. O great king! Kill him and then go to the forest. He lies there,
engaged in terrible austerities for the sake of destroying the world. O king! He will destroy the thirty gods and the
world. He cannot be killed by the gods, the daityas, the rakshasas, the nagas, the yakshas or any of the gandharvas.
O king! He has obtained such a boon from the grandfather of all the worlds. Destroy him and be fortunate. Do not
have any other resolution. Achieve a great deed and attain eternal and undecaying fame. That cruel one sleeps under the sand. He breathes at the end of the year. At that time, the entire earth, with its mountains, forests and
groves, begins to tremble. His breath raises a great cloud of dust that obstructs the path of the sun. The earth trembles for seven days. There are sparks and flames, mixed with terrible smoke. O king! It is for this reason that I cannot remain in my own hermitage. O Indra among kings! Therefore, destroy him for the welfare of the worlds.
When this asura has been killed, the worlds will be healthy again. I think that you are quite capable of destroying
him. Your energy will be increased by Vishnu's energy. Earlier, Vishnu gave me a boon for his destruction. Whichever king kills that terrible and great asura, will be united with Vishnu's own unassailable energy. O Indra among
kings! Accept that energy, which the earth finds difficult to bear. O protector of the earth! The immensely energetic
Dhundhu cannot be killed by someone who has limited energy, even if he tries for a hundred years.'"'
