'Dhritarashtra said, "O one who can see about the true nature of things! You have told me about an appropriate account. I wish to be again delighted by listening to your words, which are like amrita."

'Vidura replied, "Listen. I will again tell you about that path in detail. On listening to this, accomplished
ones are freed from the cycle of life. O king! A man who is on a long journey is exhausted and dwells
somewhere for some time. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that way, those who are limited in their
intelligence pass through this cycle of life and dwell in many wombs[In successive births.]. However, those who are learned are
freed. That is the reason those who are learned in the sacred texts speak of this[The cycle of rebirth.] as the journey. The learned
describe this unfathomable life as a forest. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those who are mortal have to
return to this world, whether they are mobile or immobile. But one who is learned is not enamoured of this.
The learned speak of the physical and mental diseases of mortals, whether they are direct or indirect, as carnivorous beasts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those with limited intelligence are not disturbed by
the large carnivorous beasts of their own deeds, even though they are always afflicted and attacked by them.
O king! Even if a man escapes from these diseases, he is subsequently enveloped by old age, destructive of
beauty. Without any support in any direction, he is submerged in the great mire of many kinds of sound,
forms, tastes, touch and scent. Years, seasons, months, fortnights, days, nights and sandhyas[The time that joins day and night, the morning and the evening twilight.] progressively
take away beauty and vitality. These are the different manifestations of time, but those with limited intelligence do not know about them. It is said that all beings here have their deeds written on them[Past deeds.]. The body
of a being is like a chariot. The soul is said to be the charioteer. The senses are said to be the horses. Deeds
and intelligence are the harnesses. He who dashes behind those swift horses is whirled around on a wheel
on this cycle of life. However, a charioteer who controls them with his intelligence does not return[That is, is not reborn.]. It is
said that the chariot which confounds those with limited intelligence belongs to Yama. O king! O lord of
men! It gives what you yourself have obtained-destruction of the kingdom, destruction of well-wishers
and the destruction of sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This subsequent craving[In the sense of repentance after an event.] only leads to
sorrow. In the course of a supreme sorrow, a righteous person should look upon the grief as medicine. One
who is firm in controlling his soul can escape from that sorrow in a way that valour, prosperity, friends and
well-wishers cannot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A brahmana who resorts to friendship and good
conduct has three horses to depend on-self-control, renunciation and lack of distraction. A man who is
stationed on that mental chariot and controls the reins of good conduct, discards all fear of death. O king!
He goes to Brahma's world."'
