Vaishampayana said, 'When the king expressed his desire to give his daughter to that great-souled Brahmana, all
the assembled kings looked at each other and were filled with anger. The kings said, "We are assembled here and
he passes us over like straw. He wishes to give Droupadi, supreme among women, to a Brahmana. This evil-hearted one does not respect us. Let us kill him. He does not deserve our respect or veneration because of qualities of
age. On account of this, let us kill this wretch who insults kings and their sons. After inviting and entertaining in
the proper fashion all the kings with food, he then shows them disrespect. In this assembly of kings, which is like a
conclave of the gods, can he not find a single king who is his equal? The sacred texts clearly say that a svayamvara
is for Kshatriyas; Brahmanas have no right in the choice of a husband. O kings! If this lady does not wish one of us
as her husband, let us throw her into the fire and return to our kingdoms. Though that Brahmana has done injury to
kings out of his impertinence and greed, he should not still be killed. After all, our kingdoms, lives, riches, sons,
grandsons and all our other wealth exist for the sake of Brahmanas. But something must be done to prevent insult
and to protect our own dharma, so that other svayamvaras do not end like this one." Having said this, those tigers
among kings, with arms like clubs, rushed at Drupada with diverse weapons, so as to kill him.

'Seeing those angry kings rush at him with bows and arrows, Drupada was frightened and sought the protection
of the Brahmanas. However, as those kings rushed at Drupada like mad elephants, Pandu's two sons[Bhima and Arjuna, who had not left the assembly. Arjuna had only left the arena.], the great
archers who conquered their enemies, advanced to repulse them. Thereupon, all the kings, their fingers clad in armour and with their weapons raised, violently rushed towards the Kuru princes, Arjuna and Bhimasena. Bhima,
the performer of amazing deeds, with immense strength and like a thunderbolt, tore up a large tree with his hands
and stripped it of all its leaves, like an elephant. With that tree, the mighty-armed Bhima, Pritha's son and the destroyer of enemies, stood next to Partha, bull among men and with long and thick arms, like Yama with his terrible
staff.

'On seeing the unthinkable feats of Jishnu and his brother, Damodara[Krishna.], the one with superhuman intelligence,
turned to his brother Halayudha, himself the performer of awesome deeds, and said, "O Sankarshana! The warrior
who has the gait of a mad bull and who holds a great bow that is 4 cubits long in his hand must be Arjuna. If I am
Vasudeva's son, there can be no doubt about this. The warrior who has uprooted a tree with his strength and is instantly ready to repulse the kings is undoubtedly Vrikodara[Bhima.]. No other mortal on earth can perform such a feat
today. O Achyuta[Usually a name used for Krishna, but here used for Balarama.]! The other one who left a while ago, with eyes like lotus petals, slender and with the gait of a
powerful lion, humble, fair and with a long and shining nose, must have been Dharmaraja. I am sure that the other
two youths, each like Kartikeya, must have been sons of the two Ashvins. I had heard that Pandu's sons and Pritha
had escaped from the fire in the house of lac." Halayudha, with a complexion like that of clouds, happily spoke to
his younger brother, "I am delighted that our father's sister Pritha, with the foremost of the Kurus, has escaped."'
