'Bhishma said, "O Indra among kings! O lord of the earth! That night, I bowed my head before the brahmanas, the
ancestors, all the gods, the beings who roam in the night and to night itself. I retreated to my bed and in private,
reflected about this in my mind. 'This extremely terrible and great battle between Jamadagni's son and me has
been going on for many days. I cannot defeat the immensely valiant brahmana in the field of battle. He is immensely strong. If I am capable of vanquishing Jamadagni's powerful son, let the gods be favourable and show me
the way tonight.' O Indra among kings! Wounded by arrows, I fell asleep that night. The foremost among brahmanas had raised me when I had fallen down from the chariot. They had held me and comforted me, asking me not
to be afraid. O great king! When it was almost dawn, on my right side, they appeared in a dream. O extender of the
Kuru linage! Listen. They surrounded me and spoke these words. 'O Gangeya! Arise and do not be frightened.
You have nothing to be scared of. O tiger among men! We are protecting you, because you have sprung from our
own bodies. There is no way in which Rama, Jamadagni's son, can defeat you in battle. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! But you will vanquish Rama in battle. You will recognize this beloved weapon of yours. When you were
in an earlier body, you used to be familiar with it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This was created by Vishvakarma. It is Prajapatya and is known by the name of prasvapan[Vishvakarma is the architect of the gods. Prajapatya can be interpreted as another name for the weapon, or as a
weapon that is associated with (or used) by Prajapati (Brahma). Prasvapan means something that puts one to
sleep.]. Rama does not know about this, nor does any
other man on earth. O mighty-armed one! O Indra among kings! Remember it and use it with force. O lord of men!
Rama will not be killed with this weapon. O one who shows honours! Therefore, there will be no sin if you use it.
Oppressed by the force of your arrow, Jamadagni's son will fall asleep. O Bhishma! Having thus defeated him, you
will then make him rise up again, with this beloved weapon of yours, named sambodhana[Sambodhana means calling or addressing. In this context, it thus means a weapon that awakens someone by calling him up.]. O Kouravya! When
you are stationed on your chariot in the morning, act as we have asked you to. Whether one is asleep, or whether
one is dead, we regard the two as equal. O king! Rama will never become mortal. Therefore, when it arrives before
you[When it is summoned mentally.], use prasvapan.' O king! Having said this, all those supreme among brahmanas disappeared. All those eight
were similar in form. All of them were radiant, like the sun personified."'
