'Dhritarashtra said, "Our army is supreme and possesses many qualities. It has many different components. O Sanjaya! It has been arranged in a vyuha according to the sacred texts and should be unassailable. We have sustained it
and it has always been extremely devoted to us. The soldiers are disciplined and free from vice and they have exhibited their valour earlier. They are not too old. Nor are they too young. They are not lean. Nor are they fat. They
are active and tall. Their bodies are well-developed and they are free from disease. They are armoured and trained
in the use of weapons. They possess many kinds of weapons. They are skilled in fighting with swords, bare arms
and in fighting with clubs. Lances, swords, clubs, iron maces, catapults, javelins and all kinds of maces, kampanas,
bows, kanapas, different kinds of slings, fighting with the bare fists-they are skilled in all these. They are devoted
to training. They have persevered in exercises. They have devotedly learned everything about the handling of
weapons. They have trained in mounting and descending, riding, moving forward, stepping back, striking effectively, advancing and retreating and are skilled. In many ways, they have been tested with elephants, horses, chariots and vehicles. Having been appropriately tested, they have been given the right kind of pay. This has not been
influenced by lineage, favours, relationships, the strength of friendship, or connections of birth or marriage. They
are prosperous people and noble. Their relatives have been treated well by us and are satisfied. We have shown
them many favours. They are famous and honoured. O son[The word used is tata.]! They are protected by many victorious ones who
are the foremost among men, famous in the worlds because of their prominent deeds. They are like the guardians
of the worlds. They are protected by many kshatriyas, who are honoured by all the people on earth. They have to
come because of their own wishes, with their armies and their followers. This is like a large ocean, with rivers
flowing into it from all directions. There are many elephants and chariots. Though these do not actually have
wings, they seem to possess wings. Our many warriors constitute the terrible waters. The mounts are the waves. It
is full of slings, swords, clubs, lances, bows and javelins. There are standards and ornaments that are embellished
with jewelled cloth. The advancing mounts are like the agitating force of the wind. It is like a great and roaring
ocean, without any limits. It is protected by Drona and Bhishma and also protected by Kritavarma, Kripa and
Duhshasana and others who are led by Jayadratha. It is also protected by Bhagadatta and Vikarna, Drona's son,
Soubala and Bahlika and many other great-souled ones who are the foremost warriors of the world. That this
should be slaughtered in battle can only be because of earlier destiny. O Sanjaya! Such a preparation[For war.] on earth
has never been seen before, by men, or by the immensely fortunate and ancient rishis. This large army is prosperous with every kind of weapon. If it should be killed in battle, how can that be anything other than destiny? O Sanjaya! To me, everything seems to be contrary. Such a terrible army cannot fight with the Pandavas in battle. Perhaps the gods have assembled here in the cause of the Pandavas. O Sanjaya! Perhaps they are fighting against my
soldiers and that is the reason they are being killed. O Sanjaya! Vidura had earlier spoken about what was beneficial medicine for me. But my evil-minded son, Duryodhana, did not accept it. It is my view that the great-souled
and omniscient one had known all this earlier. O son! He knew what was going to happen. It was preordained destiny. O Sanjaya! Perhaps all this is exactly as the creator had ordained it earlier. That is the reason it cannot be
countered."'
