'Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is no doubt that all this is true. Your sharp words
pierce me like barbs and weaken me. But I cannot blame you. My wrong course of action has brought this adversity and misery on us. I took up the dice with a desire to take away the sovereignty and kingdom of Dhritarashtra's
son. It was thus that Subala's son, the skilful and deceitful gambler, played with me for Suyodhana's sake. O Bhimasena! Shakuni, the dweller of the mountains[Shakuni was from Gandhara, a mountainous region.], is knowledgeable in great maya. He hurled out the dice in the
middle of the sabha. He used maya against me, who did not know any maya. It is then that I saw the deceit. I saw
that the dice would always follow the wishes of Shakuni and favour him in odds and evens[Ayuja is odd and yuja is even. These are numbers thrown up by the dice.]. I was capable of
restraining my mind then, but anger robs a man of his patience. O son[The word tata means son, but can be used for anyone who is a junior.]! The self cannot be controlled when it is
overcome by manliness, pride and valour. O Bhimasena! I do not take umbrage at what you have said. I think that
this was destined to be. O Bhimasena! The king who is Dhritarashtra's son wished to rob us of our kingdom and
inflict misery on us. Slavery was inflicted on us and it was Droupadi who became our only refuge.

'"Both you and Dhananjaya know what Dhritarashtra's son told us when we were summoned to the sabha yet
again to gamble with dice. In front of all the Bharatas, he told us what one throw of the dice would entail. He said,
'O prince! O Ajatashatru! Without being concealed, you will have to live in the forest of your choice for twelve
years. After that, you and your brothers will have to live for another year in concealment and without being detected. O father[The word tata means father, but can also be used for anyone who is a senior. Duryodhana was younger to
Yudhishthira.]! O Partha! But when you are roaming thus, if the spies of the Bharatas hear of you or detect you,
you will again have to spend a similar period in that fashion. Knowing this, you must give your certain promise. O
king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you are not found out during that period and manage to confound my
spies, I promise in this assembly of Kurus that you will have the five rivers back[The land of the five rivers, the region of the Punjab.]. If we are defeated by you, 'all
my brothers and I' will give up our comforts for a similar period and live accordingly.' This is what the king said
earlier in the midst of the Kurus and I gave my promise. That abominable game of dice then began there. All of us
were defeated and exiled. We are thus roaming around in these regions, in these difficult forests that are in the form
of a calamity. Even then, Suyodhana did not wish for peace. He fell prey to even greater rage. He encouraged all
the Kurus and all those who were under his control[To express delight at the discomfiture of the Pandavas.]. Having entered into an agreement before righteous ones,
who would wish to break it for the sake of a kingdom? As an arya, I think that transgression of dharma is worse
than death, even for the sake of ruling the earth.

'"You could have performed a brave deed then. You grasped your club at the time of the gamble. Had Phalguna
not restrained you, you would have burnt my arms. O Bhima! That would not have been a misdeed then. Since you
are aware of your manliness, why did you not speak up then and perform the deed at its appointed time. You have
found the time now, when it is too late. When the time has passed, what is the point of censuring me? O Bhimasena! But I suffered from misery even more, when I saw Yajnaseni oppressed and though we saw it, we restrained
ourselves. O Bhima! That was like drinking a poisonous juice. O brave one among the Bharata lineage! We cannot
do anything now. We made an agreement in the midst of the Kuru warriors. We must wait for the time, until our
happiness dawns again, like those who sow seeds wait for the fruit. If someone has been vanquished through deceit
earlier and knows that the enmity will bear flowers and fruit, such a brave one truly lives in the world of the living
and obtains many qualities through his manliness. He obtains all the prosperity in this world. I think that his enemies bow down before him. His friends gather around and worship him, and live off him, like the gods off Indra.
Know that the promise I made will be true. I think dharma is superior to immortality and life. The kingdom, sons,
fame, wealth-all of these are worth only a small fragment[The word used is kala. This means small fragment or fraction. But specifically, it also means a sixteenth
part.] of truth."'
