'Brihadashva said, "When the auspicious time and the sacred day and moment arrived, King Bhima summoned all
the lords of the earth to the svayamvara. On hearing this, all the lords of the earth, oppressed by love, swiftly went
there, hoping to win Damayanti. The kings entered the large arena, decorated with golden pillars and beautiful
gates, like lions entering a mountain. All the lords of the earth seated themselves on various seats, all of them
adorned with fragrant garlands and dazzling earrings encrusted with gems. That arena was filled with kings, like
Bhogavati[Bhogavati is the capital city of the nagas and is located in the nether regions.] with serpents, or a cave in a mountain with tigers. Their broad arms were seen to be like clubs, well
formed and with auspicious marks, like five-headed serpents. Their hair was beautiful and their noses were handsome. With these, the faces of the kings were as resplendent as stars in the firmament.

'"Then the fair-faced Damayanti entered the arena and her radiance stole the eyes and the hearts of the kings. On
whatever part of her body the sight of those great-souled ones happened to fall first, their glances remained fixed
there, without straying away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the names of the kings were being recounted, Bhima's daughter saw five men who were identical in appearance[The four gods, Shakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama had assumed forms that were identical to that of Nala.]. On seeing all of them there, undifferentiated in appearance, Vidarbha's daughter was doubtful about which one of them was King Nala. Whichever
one she looked at, seemed to be King Nala. Thus the beautiful one reflected and debated in her mind. How will I
know which are the gods and how will I know which is King Nala? Vidarbha's daughter thought in this way and
was afflicted with grief. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As she debated in this way, she remembered what
she had heard about the marks of the gods. 'I have heard from the elders about the marks of the gods. But when
they are established on the ground in this way, those cannot be perceived.' Having decided this and having reflected on this in many ways, she resolved that the time had come to seek refuge with the gods. Having shown homage
to the gods in mind and words, she joined her hands in salutation before the gods and said in a trembling voice,
'On hearing the words of the swan, I have chosen the Nishadha to be my husband. If those words are true, then let
the gods direct me towards him. I have never deviated in my mind and my speech. If that is true, then let the gods
direct me towards him. If it is true that the gods themselves have decided that the king of Nishadha should be my
husband, then let the gods direct me towards him. The lords of the worlds and the great god[Indra.] should display their
own forms, so that I may know King Punyashloka[Punyashloka is one of Nala's epithets.].' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing Damayanti's piteous lamentation and determining that she was supremely in love with Nishadha, pure in mind, intelligence,
devotion and love, the gods did what she had asked for and revealed themselves in their abilities to bear marks[That is, divine marks. Gods do not perspire. Nor do their eyes blink. Their feet do not touch the ground and
they do not have any shadows.].
She then saw all the gods, without sweat and with fixed glances. Their garlands were untouched by dust and they
stood there, without touching the ground. And she also saw Nishadha, touching the ground, with his shadow next
to him. His garland was faded with dust and he was perspiring. He was also identified by the blinking of his eyes.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She saw the gods and she also saw Punyashloka Nishadha. In accordance
with dharma, Bhima's daughter chose him. Bashfully, the large-eyed one touched the end of his garment[As a mark of choosing him.] and
placed an extremely beautiful garland around his shoulders. Thus did the beautiful one choose him as her husband.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that, the assembled kings suddenly let out sounds of lamentations. But the
gods and maharshis uttered cries of approval, and struck with wonder, spoke words praising King Nala.

'"When Bhima's daughter chose Nishadha, all the immensely energetic lords of the worlds were delighted. Together, they gave Nala eight boons[Each of the four gods gave two boons.]. Shachi's husband Shakra happily gave Nala the boon that he would be able
to see him[Indra.] at sacrifices and would attain the supreme of sacred goals. Agni gave him the boon that he would be
present whenever Nishadha desired it. Hutashana[Agni.] gave him worlds that were as resplendent as he[Agni.] himself.
Yama gave him the capacity to taste the essence of food and supreme establishment in dharma. The lord of the water[Varuna.] promised to be present whenever Nishadha desired and also gave a fragrant garland. Thus did each give two
boons. Having granted these boons, the gods returned to the world of the gods. Having witnessed Damayanti's
wedding in great wonder, the kings were extremely happy and returned whence they had come. O king! Having
obtained a gem among women, King Punyashloka pleasured with her, like the slayer of Bala and Vritra with
Shachi. The king was extremely happy and as resplendent as the sun. He pleased his subjects by protecting them in
accordance with the dharma of the brave. Like Yayati, the son of Nahusha[Yayati figures in several sections, such as Section 33.], he performed ashvamedha and
many other sacrifices, offering large quantities of gifts. With Damayanti, Nala, like an immortal, again pleasured
himself in woods and groves full of flowers. That lord of men sacrificed and sported thus. The lord of the earth
protected the earth and all its treasures."'
