Vaishampayana said, 'In this way, Shura's son heard the words of his son. The one with dharma in his soul abandoned his grief and performed a supreme funeral ceremony. He[Abhimanyu.] was always loved by his father. With his
wife, the great-souled Vasudeva performed the funeral rites for him. The mighty-armed one fed six million brahmanas. He fed them many kinds of food that possessed all the qualities. The mighty-armed Krishna satisfied all the
thirst the brahmanas possessed for riches and this made the body hair stand up. There was gold, cattle, beds and
garments.  These  were  given  away  to  the  brahmanas  and  they  said,  "Let  these  increase  more."  Dasharha
Vasudeva[Krishna.], Baladeva and Satyaki, together with Satyaka[Satyaki's father.], performed the funeral rites for  Abhimanyu. They
were tormented by great grief and could not find any peace.

'In the city of Nagasahvya, the brave Pandavas were also in a similar situation. Separated from Abhimanyu,
they could not find any tranquility. O Indra among kings! Virata's daughter did not eat for many days. On account
of her husband, she suffered greatly. However, the child in her womb had to be protected. Using his divine sight,
Vyasa got to know and arrived there. Having arrived, the intelligent and greatly energetic one spoke to the large-
eyed Pritha and to Uttara. "O illustrious one! Abandon this grief. An immensely energetic son will be born to you,
because of Vasudeva's powers and because of what I have said. When the Pandavas are dead, he will protect the
earth." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In Dharmaraja's presence, he looked towards Dhananjaya and spoke
to him, gladdening him. "O mighty-armed one! A great-minded grandson will be born to you. He will rule the
earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. O best among the Kurus! O afflicter of enemies! Therefore, conquer your
grief. There is no need to think about this. This will truly happen. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Krishna, the
brave one among the Vrishni lineage, said this earlier and this will indeed happen. There is no need to reflect on
this. O son! You should not sorrow about him[Abhimanyu.] or any of the other Kurus. They have earned and gone to the indestructible worlds of the gods." Dhananjaya, with dharma in his soul, was thus addressed by his grandfather. O great
king! He abandoned his grief and became cheerful. O one who knows about dharma! O immensely wise one! As
time passed, your father began to grow in the womb, like the moon during shuklapaksha. Vyasa urged the king
who was Dharma's son to perform a horse sacrifice and vanished. The intelligent Dharmaraja heard Vyasa's words.
He made up his mind that a journey should be undertaken to obtain the requisite riches.'
