'Lomasha said, "After hearing Bhagiratha's words, to do that which would ensure the welfare of the gods, the illustrious one replied to the king, 'O mighty-armed one! O supreme among kings! For your sake, I will bear the
pure, auspicious and divine river of the gods when she falls from the sky.' O mighty-armed one! Having said this,
he[Mahadeva.] went to the Himalayas, surrounded by his terrible attendants, who held diverse upraised weapons. Having
established himself there, he told Bhagiratha, best of men, 'O mighty-armed one! Now ask the river, the daughter
of the king of the mountains. I will bear the best of rivers when she falls from heaven. Having heard these words
spoken by Sharva[Mahadeva's name, meaning the hunter.], the king bowed and began to meditate on the Ganga, his mind controlled. On seeing the
king meditating and Ishana[Mahadeva.] established there, the one with the pure waters was suddenly dislodged from the
sky. On seeing her fall, the gods, together with the maharshis, and the gandharvas, the nagas and the rakshasas, assembled to witness the sight. Then Ganga, daughter of the Himalayas, infested with fish and crocodiles and full of
giant whirlpools, fell down from the sky. O king! Hara bore Ganga, the girdle of the sky. Falling on his forehead,
she looked like a garland of pearls. O king! Thus did the one who goes to the ocean divide herself into three
streams. Her water, filled with foam, looks like an array of swans. In some places, she is coiled tortuously. In others, she stumbles. In others, she speeds like a drunken woman, clad in a garment of foam. In some places, her waters raise a great roar, uttering the supreme of sounds. In this fashion, she performed many acts on falling from the
sky.

'"On reaching the surface of the earth, she told Bhagiratha, 'O great king! Show me the path that I should follow. O lord of the earth! It is for your sake that I have descended on earth.' O best of men! Hearing these words,
King Bhagiratha went to the place where the bodies of the great-souled sons of Sagara were kept, so that they
might be purified with the sacred waters. Having borne Ganga, Hara, worshipped by the worlds, went to Kailasa,
best of mountains, with the thirty gods. Going to the ocean with Ganga, the king forcefully filled up the ocean,
Varuna's abode. The king thought of Ganga as his daughter. His desires having been fulfilled, he offered oblations
to his ancestors there. I have told you everything about the three-streamed Ganga and how she descended on earth
to fill up the ocean, which was drunk up by the great-souled one for a specific reason, and how Agastya brought
Vatapi, the killer of brahmanas, to his destruction. O lord! O great king! I have told you everything that you
asked."'
