Sanjaya said, "Without any fear, the Kurus and the Srinjayas started to fight again. The Parthas had Yudhishthira
at the forefront and we had Vaikartana at the forefront. There was a fierce battle between Karna and the Pandavas
and it extended Yama's kingdom and made the body hair stand up. That tumultuous battle created waves of blood.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Only a few of the samshaptakas remained. O great king! With Dhrishtadyumna and all the kings, the maharatha Pandavas rushed against Karna. They were cheerful and attacked in that battle,
desiring victory. Alone in that battle, Karna received them, like a mountain receives a flood of water. Having
clashed against Karna, those maharathas were shattered and beaten back in all the directions, like a flood of water
against a mountain. O great king! The battle that commenced made the body hair stand up. Dhristhadyumna angrily asked Radheya to wait and struck him with an arrow with drooping tufts. The maharatha[Karna. Vijaya was the name of Karna's bow.] brandished Vijaya,
foremost among bows, and severed Parshata's bow with arrows that were like venomous serpents. He angrily
struck Parshata with nine arrows. O unblemished one! The great-souled one shattered his gold-decorated armour
and, covered with blood, they[The arrows.] looked as beautiful as shakragopa insects. Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna discarded
his severed bow and picked up another bow. With seven straight-tufted arrows that were like venomous serpents,
he pierced Karna. O king! In that fashion, Karna, the great archer, pierced Parshata, the scorcher of enemies and
Drona's enemy[Dhrishtadyumna killed Drona.], with sharp arrows. O great king! Karna angrily dispatched a gold-decorated arrow that was
like Yama's staff. O lord of the earth! O king! On seeing it suddenly descend, terrible in form, Shini's descendant
displayed the lightness of his hand and shattered it into seven fragments. O lord of the earth! On seeing that the arrow had been repulsed by arrows, Karna showered arrows from every direction on Satyaki. In that encounter, he
pierced him with seven iron arrows and Shini's descendant pierced him back with arrows that were decorated with
gold. The battle that raged was fearful to those who saw and heard. O king! Though it was fearful in every direction, it was wonderful to see. O king! On witnessing the deeds of Karna and Shini's descendant in the battle, the
body hair of all the beings there stood up.

' "Drona's son was extremely strong. At that time, he rushed against Parshata, the destroyer of enemies who
could rob the valour of the foe. Dhananjaya was still at a distance and Drona's son angrily addressed him[Dhrishtadyumna.]. 'O
slayer of a brahmana! Stay. Stay. You will not escape from me with your life.' Having spoken thus, the brave one
swiftly struck Parshata and enveloped him with sharp arrows that were terrible in form and extremely energetic.
The maharatha[Dhrishtadyumna.] strove to the best of his capacity. O venerable one! In the encounter, Drona's son glanced towards Parshata and in that encounter, Parshata, the slayer of enemy heroes, also glanced towards Drona's son. In
the battle, Drona's son was delighted to see Parshata, the slayer of enemy heroes. But he was not greatly delighted,
thinking that his own death might be before him[However, Ashvatthama was immortal.]. O Indra among kings! On seeing Dhrishtadyumna stationed
in the battle, Drona's brave son sighed with anger and attacked Parshata. On seeing each other, they were overcome with supreme rage. O great king! O lord of the earth! Drona's powerful son swiftly approached Dhrishtadyumna and said, 'O worst of the Panchala lineage! I will send you to death. On an earlier occasion, you committed an evil deed by killing Drona. O stupid one! You will regret that today and no longer remain hale, as long as
you are stationed in the battle and not protected by Partha. I am telling you this truthfully.' Having been thus addressed, the powerful Dhrishtadyumna replied. 'I will reply to your words with my sword, which also answered
your father when he endeavoured in the battle. You are a brahmana only in name. If Drona could be slain by me,
why should I not use my valour and kill you in the battle?' O great king! Having spoken thus, the intolerant Parshata, the commander-in-chief, pierced Drona's son with sharp arrows. O king! In that encounter, Drona's son became wrathful and enveloped Dhrishtadyumna from every direction with straight-tufted arrows. O great king!
Shrouded by thousands of arrows everywhere, the sky, the directions and the warriors could not be seen. O king!
In that fashion, while the son of a suta looked on, Parshata enveloped Drona's son, the ornament of a battle, with
arrows. O great king! Meanwhile, while everyone looked on from every direction, Radheya single-handedly countered the Panchalas, the Pandavas, Droupadi's sons, Yudhamanyu and maharatha Satyaki. In the battle, Dhrishtadyumna severed the bow of Drona's son. Abandoning that bow in the battle, he picked up another bow that was
powerful and terrible. O Indra among kings! Using arrows that were like venomous serpents, he sliced down Parshata's bow, javelin, club and standard and in an instant, used his arrows to destroy his horses, charioteer and chariot. His bow was severed. He was without a chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. He grasped a
giant sword and a shield that blazed like the sun and was marked with the sign of one hundred moons. O Indra
among kings! However, Drona's maharatha son was brave. He was firm in using weapons and light in use of his
hands. Before he[Dhrishtadyumna.] could descend from his chariot, he swiftly severed these with his broad-headed arrows and it
was extraordinary. Dhrishtadyumna was without a chariot. His horses had been slain and his bow had been severed. O best of the Bharata lineage! The maharatha[Ashvatthama.] tried his best. But though he tried his best, pierced him with
many arrows and shattered his weapons, he could not kill him. O king! When Drona's son could not kill him with
his arrows, the brave one cast aside his bow and quickly advanced towards Parshata. O king! The great-souled one
attacked and descended powerfully, like Garuda descending to pick up the best of serpents.

' "At this moment, Madhava spoke to Arjuna. 'O Partha! Behold. Drona's son is making great efforts for Parshata's destruction and there is no doubt that he will kill him. O mighty-armed one! Free Parshata, the scorcher of
enemies. He has reached the mouth of Drona's son, as if he is within the mouth of death.' O great king! Having
said this, the powerful Vasudeva swiftly urged the horses towards the spot where Drona's son was. Those horses
possessed the complexion of the moon and were urged by Keshava. As they advanced towards the chariot of
Drona's son, they seemed to drink up the sky. O king! On seeing that the immensely valorous and radiant Krishna
and Dhananjaya were advancing, the immensely strong one[Ashvatthama.] made great efforts to kill Dhrishtadyumna. O lord
of men! On seeing that Dhrishtadyumna was being dragged[Ashvatthama was dragging Dhrishtadyumna by the hair.], the immensely strong Partha shot arrows towards
Drona's son. Those arrows were decorated with gold and dispatched from Gandiva. They severely struck Drona's
son and penetrated, like serpents entering a termite hill. Drona's powerful son was devastated by those fierce arrows. Afflicted by Dhananjaya's arrows, the brave one climbed onto his chariot. He picked up his supreme bow
and pierced Partha with arrows. O lord of men! At this time, the brave Sahadeva picked up Parshata, the scorcher
of enemies, on his chariot and bore him away. O great king! Arjuna pierced Drona's son with arrows and Drona's
son angrily struck him on the arms and the chest. Becoming enraged in that battle, Partha used an iron arrow that
was like death. It was like Yama's staff and he released it towards Drona's son. Immensely radiant, it descended on
the brahmana's shoulder. O great king! In that battle, because of the force of that arrow, he lost his senses. Overcome by supreme lassitude, he sank down on the floor of his chariot. O great king! On seeing Arjuna engaged in
the battle, Karna repeatedly brandished his Vijaya bow. In the great battle, he desired to have a duel with Partha.
On seeing that the brave one[Ashvatthama.] had lost his senses, his charioteer used his chariot to swiftly bear the destroyer of
enemies away from the field of battle. O great king! On seeing that Parshata had been freed and Drona's son afflicted, the Panchalas were delighted and became hopeful of victory. Thousands of divine musical instruments
were sounded. On witnessing such terrible and extremely wonderful deeds, they roared like lions. Having done
this, Partha Dhananjaya spoke to Vasudeva. 'O Krishna! Proceed towards the samshaptakas. That should be my
next task.' On hearing the words spoken by Pandava, Dasharha departed on the chariot that had many banners and
possessed the speed of the wind or thoughts." '
