Souti said, 'O Brahmana! Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, then had a son from his wife, named Sukanya. Sukanya's
son was the great-souled Pramati, of resplendent energy. In turn, Pramati had a son named Ruru, from Ghritachi.
Ruru had a son named Shunaka from his wife Pramadvara. O Brahmana! I will tell you all the accounts of Ruru,
whose energy was resplendent. Listen to it in detail. In days long gone by, there was a sage named Sthulakesha. He
possessed the power of austerities and learning and was known for devoting himself to the welfare of all creatures.
O Brahmana! O sage! At this time, Menaka[An apsara. Apsaras are celestial maidens associated with Indra's court. They are sometimes regarded as
wives of gandharvas.] conceived a child through the king of the gandharvas, named Vishvavasu. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! When the time came, the apsara Menaka delivered her child near
Sthulakesha's hermitage. After leaving her child on the banks of the river, she went away. The great sage and great
Brahmana, Sthulakesha, found the daughter abandoned on the banks of the river. He saw her to be blazing in beauty, like the child of an immortal. On finding her, the best of the sages was driven by compassion and adopted her.
The beautiful and radiant girl grew up in that hermitage. Since she was superior to all the others in beauty and in
every quality, the great sage gave her the name of Pramadvara[Literally, the most beautiful.].

'When Ruru saw Pramadvara in that hermitage of his[Sthulakesha.], the righteous man, in control over himself, fell in love
with her. Through his friends, he made his father Pramati, descended from Bhrigu, acquainted with his love.
Thereupon, Pramati asked the famous Sthulakesha. Then the sage engaged Pramadvara with Ruru, fixing the date
for marriage as one when the nakshatra[Star.] Bhagadaiva[Better known as Uttaraphalguni.] would be in the ascendant. A few days before the date
fixed for the wedding, when the beautiful girl was playing with her friends, her time having come and driven by
destiny, she didn't see a coiled snake and stepped on it with her foot. Driven by the requirements of destiny, the
snake sunk its venomous fangs into the body of the careless girl. As soon as she was bitten by the snake, she suddenly fell down senseless on the ground. She, who was so beautiful when alive, became painful to look at when
dead. Thanks to the snake's venom, the slender-waisted girl looked more beautiful than when alive, as if asleep on
the ground. Her father and other hermits who were there, saw her lying motionless on the ground, as beautiful as a
lotus. Overcome with compassion, all the best of Brahmanas assembled there-Svastyatreya, Mahajanu, Kushika,
Shankhamekhala, Bharadvaja, Kounakutsa, Arshtisena and Goutama, and also Pramati and his son and other inhabitants of the forest. They were overcome with compassion when they saw the maiden dead with the snake's
venom and wept. But in great pain, Ruru left.'
