Vaishampayana said, 'When the fire blazed up, the Sharngakas were extremely distressed, miserable and extremely
anxious, because they could not find any means of escaping. O lord of men! Listening to her young sons, their ascetic mother Jarita was stricken with grief and began to lament.

'Jarita said, "This terrible fire is burning the inside of the forest and advancing towards us. It has blazed up the
entire universe and is increasing my misery. My children still have imperfect understanding; they are without
feathers and feet. Yet they are the ultimate refuge of our ancestors and are tugging at me. The blazing fire is advancing, licking the tall trees with its tongue and creating terror. My sons still do not have strength and are unable
to escape. Nor can I escape somewhere else, taking my sons with me. I cannot abandon them and my heart is distressed. Which one of my sons will I leave and which will I take with me? What should I do? O my sons! What do
you think? Even after thinking a lot, I can find no means of escape for you. I will now cover you with my body and
die with you. In earlier times, your cruel father abandoned you, uttering these words, 'My lineage will be established on Jaritari, because he is the eldest. Sarisrikva will have offspring, extending the lineage of my ancestors.
Stambamitra will practise austerities and Drona will be supreme in knowledge of the brahman.' Who will I take
with me and leave and who will suffer the greatest of calamities?" She was bereft of judgement because she did
not know what was the right course of action. Through her own thoughts she did not see any means whereby her
sons might escape from the fire.

'When she had spoken in this way, the four Sharngakas spoke to their mother. "O mother! Give up your love for
us and go to a place where there is no fire. If we are destroyed, you will have other sons. O mother! But if you are
destroyed, there will be no progeny in our lineage. O mother! After taking into consideration these two outcomes,
the time has come for you to do that which is best for our lineage. Out of love for your sons, do not do anything
that will destroy our lineage. The act of our father, who wishes to attain the worlds, must not amount to nothing."

Jarita replied, "Near this tree, there is a rat hole in the ground. Swiftly enter the hole and you will suffer no fear
from the fire there. O sons! When you have entered it, I will cover the hole with dirt. That is the only means that I
can think of to counter the blazing fire. When the fire has died out, I will return and remove the mass of dirt. If you
wish to escape from the fire, listen to these words of mine." The Sharngakas said, "We are only masses of flesh,
without feathers, and the carnivorous rat will destroy us. On beholding this fear, we cannot enter. We do not know
how we can escape being burnt by the fire or being eaten by the rat. How can our father attain fulfilment and how
can our mother survive? The dwellers of the sky will either be destroyed in the hole by the rat or by the fire. Considering both the possibilities, it is better to be burnt than to be eaten. To die from being eaten by a rat in a hole is a
most miserable death. But destruction of the body by fire has been sanctioned by the learned."'
