'Yudhishthira asked, "O illustrious one! You have separately related the births of Rama and each of the others. O
brahmana! Now I wish to hear about the reasons for their exile. Please recount it. O brahmana! Why were
Dasharatha's brave sons, Rama and Lakshmana, and the famous Maithili[Sita. The daughter of the king of Mithila, that is, Janaka.] exiled to the forest?"

'Markandeya said, "King Dasharatha was delighted at sons being born. He was devoted to rites and to the practice of dharma. He always served his superiors. In course of time, his sons grew and became greatly energetic.
They became learned in the Vedas and their secrets and were skilled in the use of weapons. O king! When they had
completed the period of brahmacharya, they got married. At each such time, Dasharatha was pleased and happy.
Among them, the eldest was Rama and he was known thus because he pleased the subjects[The word rama means pleasing, delightful, gratifying.]. He was charming
and wise and was the delight of his father's heart. Then the king thought that he was too advanced in age. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He consulted his advisers and the priests, who were learned about dharma, about
instating Rama as the heir apparent[Yuvaraja. Literally, the young king.]. All of them, the best of advisers, thought that the appropriate time had arrived. His[Rama's.] eyes were red. His arms were large. His gait was like that of a mad elephant. His arms were long. His
chest was broad. He was dark in complexion. His hair was curled. He was radiant, handsome and brave. He was
like Shakra in his strength. He was learned in all dharma. He was like Brihaspati in his intelligence. Everyone was
devoted to him. He was skilled in all forms of knowledge. He was in control of his senses. He was pleasant to behold, even to his enemies. He controlled those who were not virtuous. He protected those who followed dharma.
He had fortitude. He was unassailable. He was victorious. He could not be vanquished. O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! King Dasharatha looked at such a son, one who extended Kousalya's[Spelt as Kousalya, rather than Koushalya, here.] joy, and was extremely delighted.
On thinking about the qualities of the valorous and immensely energetic Rama, he happily spoke to his priest. 'O
fortunate one! O brahmana! There is an auspicious conjunction of Pushya nakshatra today. Let all the requirements
be gathered and let Rama be invited.' Hearing these words of the king, Manthara went to Kaikeyi and spoke these
words at the appropriate time. 'O Kaikeyi! The king has proclaimed your great misfortune today. O unfortunate
one! A fierce, angry and virulent serpent is biting you. Kousalya is indeed the fortunate one, since her son will be
instated. Where is your good fortune if your son does not obtain a share of the kingdom?' On hearing these words,
she[Kaikeyi.] adorned herself in all her ornaments. She was radiant in her supreme beauty, with a middle that was shaped
like an altar. She approached her husband secretly. Smiling charmingly, as if in love, the sweet-smiling one spoke
these honeyed words. 'You are always truthful in your promises. O king! You had earlier promised me a wish.
Grant me that favour now and free yourself of the burden.' The king replied, 'I am ready to grant you the boon.
You will get what you desire. Is there anyone who must be killed today, though he does not deserve to be killed? Is
there any one imprisoned, who must be freed today? Who should be given riches today? Or is there anyone, from
whom it must be taken away? All the riches are mine, except those that belong to brahmanas.' When she heard
these words, she bound the king to his promise. Knowing her own strength, she spoke these words. 'Let Bharata be
instated with the ingredients that have been arranged for Rama. Let Raghava[Raghava is Rama's name, because one of his ancestors was Raghu.] go to the forest.' The king heard
these unpleasant and terrible worlds. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! He was so miserable that he could not
say anything. On learning what his father had said, the valorous Rama, with dharma in his soul, went to the forest,
so that the king might remain true to his promise. O fortunate one! He was followed by the prosperous Lakshmana,
with the bow in his hand, and his wife Vaidehi Sita, Janaka's daughter[Janaka's kingdom was Videha and its capital was Mithila. So Sita is known as Vaidehi and Maithili.].

'"When Rama had departed for the forest, following the due dharma of time, King Dasharatha gave up his body.
With Rama having left and the king having departed, the queen Kaikeyi had Bharata brought and spoke these
words to him[Bharata and Shatrughna were away at the time, visiting their maternal uncles.]. 'Dasharatha has gone to heaven. Rama and Lakshmana have left for the forest. Accept this large
kingdom, without any obstacles, and with all its thorns removed.' On hearing these words, the one with dharma in
his soul replied, 'You have committed a violent deed. Out of avarice for riches, you have killed your husband and
destroyed this lineage. O mother! O destroyer of the lineage! You have brought ill fame on my head. Satisfy your
desire now.' Speaking thus, he began to weep. Thus displaying his character before all the subjects, he left after his
brother Rama, desiring to bring him back. He placed Kousalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra in vehicles at the back. Then
extremely miserably, he set out with Shatrughna, Vasishtha, Vamadeva, thousands of other brahmanas and residents of the city and the country, with the intention of bringing Rama back. He saw Rama and Lakshmana in Chitrakuta[In Satna district of Madhya Pradesh. The Chitrakuta region spills over into Uttar Pradesh too.]. He had a bow in his hand and was adorned in the ornaments of ascetics. But fixed on making his father's promise come true, Rama dismissed him. He ruled the kingdom from Nandigrama, with the sandals in
front[Bharata did not return to Ayodhya, awaiting Rama's return. He chose a place named Nandigrama, a short distance away from Ayodhya. He had brought back Rama's sandals and placed these on the throne, as a symbol of
kingship.]. Rama was concerned that the inhabitants of the city and the country might return again. He entered the
great forest near the hermitage of Sharabhanga. He paid his respects to Sharabhanga and found refuge in Dandakaranya. He lived in the beautiful region along the banks of the river Godavari.

'"While he lived there, because of Shurpanakha's deeds, Rama had a great enmity with Khara, who used to reside in Janasthana. In order to protect the ascetics, Raghava, devoted to dharma, killed fourteen thousand rakshasas
on earth. By killing the immensely powerful Khara and Dushana[Khara's younger brother.], the wise Raghava brought safety to that forest
of dharma again. With those rakshasas slain, Shurpanakha, with her nose and lips sliced off[They were severed by Lakshmana.], went to her brother's abode in Lanka. Unconscious with grief, the rakshasi went to Ravana. With dried blood on her face, she fell
down at her brother's feet. On seeing her so mutilated, Ravana became senseless with anger. He gnashed his teeth
in anger and jumped up from his seat. He dismissed his advisers and privately asked her, 'O fortunate one! Who
has done this to you, without thinking of me and disrespecting me? Who has had a sharp spear pierced all over his
body? Who is sleeping securely and happily, having lit a fire by his head? Who has kicked a terrible and virulent
serpent? Who has touched the teeth of a lion with manes?' While he was speaking these words, sparks of flame issued from the openings in his body, like from the hollows of a flaming tree at night. Then his sister told him everything about Rama's valour and the defeat of Khara and Dushana, accompanied by the other rakshasas. Having decided on what was to be done, having comforted his sister and having made due arrangements for the protection of
the city, the king[Ravana.] rose up into the sky. He crossed the mountains Trikuta and Kala and saw the great and deep
ocean, the abode of makaras. Dashanana passed over it and went to Gokarna[Coastal town in Karnataka, with a famous Shiva temple.], the secure and beloved region of
the great-souled wielder of the trident. Dashanana went to Maricha, his former adviser. Because of his fear of
Rama, he had earlier become an ascetic."'
