'Lomasha said, "When Agastya thought that she had become capable of leading a householder's life, he went to
Vidarbha, lord of the earth and said, 'O king! I have decided to be a householder for the sake of a son. O lord of
the earth! I am asking for Lopamudra. Bestow her on me.' Having been thus addressed by the sage, the lord of the
earth lost his senses. He was incapable of refusing and he was unwilling to give. The lord of the earth went to his
wife and told her, 'The maharshi is full of valour. If angered, the flames of his curse will consume us.' At that time,
on seeing the lord of the earth and his wife thus miserable, Lopamudra went to them and spoke these words. 'O
lord of the earth! You should not be miserable on my account. O father! Bestow me on Agastya and save yourself.'

O lord of the earth! On hearing his daughter's words, the king bestowed Lopamudra, in accordance with the appropriate rites, on the great-souled Agastya.

'"Having obtained Lopamudra as his wife, Agastya told her, 'Throw away those expensive garments and ornaments.' The long-eyed one's thighs were like those of Rambha[Rambha is the name of an apsara and the translation has been done with this meaning in mind. However,
rambha is also the name of a plantain tree. Therefore, with thighs like plantain, is also an accurate translation.]. The garments were beautiful to see, expensive
and fine. But at that, she discarded them. She donned bark and skins and rags. The long-eyed one became an equal
in her vows. On going to Gangadvara, together with the wife who was devoted to him, the illustrious one, supreme
among rishis, undertook severe austerities. She then served her husband with love and respect. The illustrious
Agastya also exhibited great affection towards his wife. O lord of the earth! Thus, a lot of time passed. One day,
the illustrious rishi saw Lopamudra after a bath. She was radiant in her austerities. He was pleased with her servitude, her purity and her self-control. He was pleased with her loveliness and her beauty and summoned her for
intercourse.

'"Then the beautiful one joined her hands in salutation, and as if in shame, spoke these words of love to the illustrious one. 'There is no doubt that a husband marries a wife for the sake of offspring. O rishi! But you should
act towards me in accordance with the love I bear towards you. O brahmana! You should come to me on a bed like
the bed in my father's house, in his palace. I desire that you should be garlanded and adorned in ornaments. I wish
to be adorned in divine ornaments that please me.' Agastya replied, 'O Lopamudra! O one with the beautiful
waist! O fortunate one! I do not possess riches that are equal to those of your father.' Lopamudra said, 'O great
lord! In an instant, through your austerities, you can bring all the riches that can be found in the world of the living.' Agastya replied, 'What you say is true. But that will fritter away my austerities. Ask me to do that which will
not waste my austerities.' Lopamudra said, 'O one rich in austerities! Only a little bit of my season is left. I do not
wish to come to you in any other way. O one rich in austerities! I do not wish your dharma to be destroyed in any
way. You should therefore do what I desire, while taking care of that.' Agastya replied, 'O fortunate one! O beautiful one! Your mind has decided in accordance with your desire. I will go. Stay here according to your wishes.'"'
