Janamejaya asked, 'O excellent one! When the great-souled Parthas lived in the forest, what did the sons of Dhritarashtra, great archers, do? What about Karna Vaikartana, the immensely strong Shakuni, Bhishma, Drona and
Kripa? You should tell me all this.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! When the Parthas had left in that way and Suyodhana had been freed by the
sons of Pandu and had returned to Hastinapura, Bhishma spoke these words to Dhritarasthra's son[Duryodhana.]. "O son[The word used is tata.]! I
had told you earlier, when you had intended to go to the forest of ascetics, that I did not like the idea of the trip.
But you went despite that. O brave one! You were then forcibly taken captive by the enemies. You were freed by
the virtuous Pandavas. But you still have no shame. O Gandhari's son! O lord of the earth! In your sight and in the
presence of your army, the suta's son[Karna.] was frightened of the gandharvas and fled from the field of battle. O Indra
among kings! O son of a king! While you and your soldiers cried in distress, you witnessed the valour of the great-
souled Pandavas and that of the mighty-armed and evil-minded Karna, the son of a suta. O supreme among kings!
Whether it is in knowledge of arms, valour, dharma or devotion to dharma, Karna is not worth a small part of the
Pandavas. O foremost among those who strive for peace! Therefore, for the welfare of this lineage, I think that
peace with the great-souled Pandavas is desirable." O king! Having heard Bhishma's words, Dhritarashtra's son,
the lord of men, laughed and abruptly departed with Soubala.

'On seeing him leave, Karna, Duhshasana and the other mighty archers followed the immensely strong son of
Dhirtarashtra. O king! Having seen them depart, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, lowered his head in shame
and left for his own house. O great king! When Bhishma had gone, Dhritarashtra's son, the lord of men, returned
to that spot again and consulted with his advisers. "What is the best course of action for us? What is left to be
done? How should we act now[Duryodhana is speaking.]?" O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He sought advice thus. Karna replied, "O
Duryodhana! O Kourava! Listen to what I have to say. O destroyer of enemies! Having listened to it, act accordingly. O brave one! O supreme among kings! The earth is yours now, without any rivals. O great-minded one!
With your enemies killed, protect it like Shakra." Having been thus addressed by Karna, the king again spoke to
Karna. "O bull among men! Nothing can be unattained by one who has someone like you. You are my aide and
you are always ready to serve me. I will now tell you about my intention. Listen to it attentively. O son of a suta!
On witnessing the great and supreme rajasuya sacrifice of the Pandavas, I am filled with the desire of undertaking
it and satisfy my wishes." Having been thus addressed, Karna spoke to the king. "O supreme among kings! All the
lords of the earth have now been brought under your subjugation. Summon the foremost among brahmanas and
collect offerings, in accordance with the prescribed rites. O best of the Kuru lineage! Let all the ingredients and requirements for the sacrifice be collected. O king! O destroyer of enemies! Let the summoned officiating priests,
learned in the Vedas, perform the rites in accordance with the sacred texts. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let
your great sacrifice have plenty to eat and drink and let it also be extremely prosperous, with all the qualities." O
lord of the earth! Having been thus addressed by Karna, Dhritarashtra's son summoned the priest and spoke these
words to him. "Arrange for rajasuya, the best of sacrifices, with the best of dakshina, and according to all the rites
in the proper order." Having been thus addressed by the king, the bull among brahmanas replied. "O best of
Kouravas! O supreme among kings! That best of sacrifices cannot be performed in your lineage as long as Yudhishthira is alive. O king! Your father Dhritarashtra, with a long life, is also alive. O supreme among kings! Because of these reasons, you cannot perform this sacrifice. O lord! However, there is another great sacrifice that is
equal to the rajasuya. O Indra among kings! Listen to my words and perform that sacrifice. O king! All the lords of
the earth who pay you tribute, will bring tributes of gold, worked and unworked. O supreme among kings! With
this, you must have a plough constructed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Plough the sacrificial ground with
this. O foremost among kings! Let a sacrifice be organized there, well arranged and with plenty of food. Without
obstructions in any direction, let it be held there, in accordance with the rites. This sacrifice has the name of Vaishnava and is familiar to all righteous ones. No one except the ancient Vishnu has ever performed it. This great sacrifice is the equal of rajasuya, supreme among sacrifices. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is attractive to us
and will ensure your welfare. Let it be performed without obstructions and your desires will be fruitful." Having
been thus addressed by the brahmanas, Dhritarashtra's son, the lord of the earth, spoke to Karna, Soubala and his
brothers. "There is no doubt that the words of the brahmanas are attractive to me. If they are attractive to you, let
me know that, without any delay." Having been thus addressed, all of them agreed to what the king had said. Then,
in due order, the king gave instructions to the appointed people. He instructed all the artisans to construct the
plough. O best of kings! Everything that he had instructed was carried out in the due order.'
