Vaishampayana said, 'There was a battle between Kiriti and the Trigartas, who were firm in their enmity and had
been slain[In Kurukshetra.]. However, their maharatha sons and grandsons clashed against him. They got to know that the
supreme horse, meant for the sacrifice, had arrived on the outskirts of their kingdom. Those brave ones armoured
themselves and surrounded it. The charioteers affixed their quivers. Their well-trained horses were decorated. O
king! They surrounded the horse and attempted to seize it[If the horse is not challenged, one acknowledges the superiority of the king the horse belongs to and becomes a
vassal. If this is not acceptable, the horse is seized and a battle ensues.]. At this, Kiriti thought about what the king had desired. The scorcher of enemies first tried to pacify and restrain those brave ones. However, all of them ignored this
and attacked him with their arrows. They were overcome with tamas and rajas and Kiriti tried to check them. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Jishnu seemed to laugh and said, "O ones who don't know about dharma! Refrain. It is best to remain alive." Dharmaraja had said, "O Partha! The kings whose relatives have been slain should
not be killed." Because of this, the brave one tried to restrain them. Having heard the words of the intelligent Dharmaraja, he tried to follow them. However, they did not retreat. In the battle, Dhananjaya laughed. He enveloped
Suryavarma, king of the Trigartas, in a net of arrows. They filled all the directions with the clatter of their chariots,
the noise of the wheels and the sound of the hooves and attacked Dhananjaya. O Indra among kings! Suryavarma
exhibited his dexterity in the use of weapons. He shot hundreds of arrows with drooping tufts towards Partha.
There were other great archers who followed him. Desiring to slay Dhananjaya, they released showers of arrows.
O king! However, Pandava shot many shafted arrows from his own bowstring and severed those arrows, so that
they fell down on the ground. The energetic Ketuvarma[Suryavarma's younger brother.] was youthful and younger. For the sake of his brother,
he fought against the great-souled Pandava. On seeing that Ketuvarma was descending on him in the battle, Bib-
hatsu, the slayer of enemy heroes, slew him with sharp arrows. When Ketuvarma was killed in the encounter, maharatha Dhritavarma swiftly advanced on a chariot and enveloped Jishnu with arrows. On seeing the swiftness of
the young Dhritavarma, the valiant and immensely energetic Gudakesha was gratified. The son of Paka's chastiser
could not discern when he affixed an arrow, aimed it and shot it. In the encounter, he honoured Dhritavarma. For a
short while in the battle, he was mentally delighted with him. He was like an enraged serpent and the brave one of
the Kuru lineage smiled at him. O great king! Since he did not wish to take away his life, he initially fought affectionately with him. However, protected by the infinitely energetic Partha, Dhritavarma released a sharp arrow at
Vijaya. Swiftly, it severely pierced Vijaya in the hand and in pain, he released Gandiva, which fell down on the
ground. O  lord!  O  supreme  among  the  Bharata  lineage!  When  the  bow  fell  down  from  Savyasachi's  hand,  it
seemed to have the form of Indra's weapon[Indra's bow, the rainbow.]. O king! When that giant and divine bow fell down in that great battle, Dhritavarma laughed out loudly. Enraged, Jishnu wiped the blood from his hand. He picked up the divine bow
and rained down a shower of arrows. The tumultuous noise seemed to touch heaven, as many kinds of creatures
praised that deed. In his anger, Jishnu looked like Yama at the end of a yuga. On seeing this, the Trigarta warriors
quickly surrounded him, desiring to save Dhritavarma. When Gudakesha Dhananjaya was surrounded, his anger
increased. Using sharp arrows that were like the great Indra's vajra, he swiftly killed eighteen warriors. They began to run away. On seeing this, Dhananjaya quickly shot arrows that were like virulent snakes and laughed out
aloud. All the Trigarta maharathas were distressed in their minds. Afflicted by Dhananjaya's arrows, they fled in all
the directions. They spoke to the tiger among men, the slayer of samshaptakas[These warriors took an oath that they would not retreat alive from the field of battle. They were from Trigarta
and were killed by Arjuna in the Kurukshetra war, the incident having been described in Section 66 (Volume 5).]. "All of us are your servants. All
of us have been subjugated by you. O Partha! Command us. We are here, awaiting your instructions. O descendant
of the Kourava lineage! All of us will do what is agreeable to you." Hearing these words of subjugation from all of
them, he told them, "O kings! Save your lives and accept my suzerainty."'
