'Drupada said, "O maharshi! I sought to act in the way that I had said only when I had not heard these words from
you. I cannot act against what has been ordained. I wish to act as you have said. The knot tied by destiny cannot be
untied. There is nothing that results from our own actions. The rites set out for one husband must now become the
rites for this rule[Of many husbands.]. Since Krishna herself repeatedly asked for many husbands in ancient times, the great god accordingly granted her the boon. The god himself knows what is best. Since Shankara has ordained it to be thus,
dharma or adharma, I will commit no sin. Therefore, since Krishna is ordained to them, let them take her hand as
they wish, according to the prescribed rites."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then the great lord[Vyasa.] spoke to Dharmaraja, "O son of Pandu! Today is an auspicious day.
The moon has entered the constellation Pushya. Today, you accept Krishna's hand first." At that, King
Yajnasena[Drupada.] and his son made arrangements for the wedding. He made ready a lot of wealth for the marriage. After she had bathed and had been adorned with many jewels, he brought out his daughter Krishna. To witness the
marriage ceremony, the king's friends and relatives happily came there, with advisers and many Brahmanas and
chief citizens. Crowded with those who had come for alms, the extensive festive grounds thick with lotuses and
lilies, lined with heaps of precious stones, his palace looked like the sky, studded with brilliant stars. Then the
young Kuru princes bathed. Adorned with earrings and ornaments, dressed in expensive garments and perfumed
with sandalwood paste, they performed the preparatory ceremony and other auspicious rites. O lord! Accompanied
by their priest Dhoumya, as radiant as the fire, they then joyfully entered, in due order and one after another, like
mighty bulls entering a pen.

'Then the priest[Dhoumya.] who knew the Vedas built and lit the sacrificial fire and poured offerings, with mantras. He
then called Yudhishthira and united him with Krishna. Then the Veda-knowing one married them, making them
walk around the fire, hand in hand. Then the priest took leave of that ornament of battle[Yudhishthira.] and went out of the
palace. Then those maharathas, bringers of fame to the Kuru lineage, sons of a king among men, took the hand of
that supreme among women, in succession, one day after another[That is, Bhima got married on the next day, Arjuna on the next, and so on.]. The devarshi[Vyasa.] told me something extremely
wonderful, beyond human powers. That slender-waisted and great lady regained her virginity from one day to another[That is, she regained her virginity after the earlier day's marriage.].

'When the marriage was over, Drupada gave those maharathas a lot of gifts-100 supreme chariots adorned
with gold, each yoked to four horses with golden bridles; 100 elephants with lotus marks on them, like a hundred
mountains with golden peaks; and 100 young maidservants dressed in expensive garments and adorned with ornaments and garlands. Making the fire his witness, the king of the lunar dynasty[Drupada.], befitting his might, separately
gave each of those[The Pandavas.] a lot of wealth, garments and ornaments and other riches. When the marriage was over and
the mighty Pandavas, the equals of Indra, had obtained their Shri, along with her great wealth, they lived in the city
of the king of Panchala.'
