Vaishampayana said, 'Having been attacked by old age, Yayati returned to his capital. He summoned his eldest and
best son Yadu and said, "O son! Old age, wrinkles and grey hair have overcome me, because of a curse imposed by
Kavya Ushanas. But I am not yet satiated with youth. O Yadu! Take upon yourself this guilt and the consequent
old age. I can then enjoy pleasures with your youth. When 1000 years have passed, I shall return your youth to you
and take over the guilt and the consequent old age." Yadu replied, "O king! White hair and beard, cheerlessness,
flabbiness, wrinkles on the body, ugliness, weakness, thinness, incapacity to work, defeat by the young and forsaking by those who depend on you-I do not wish for this old age." Yayati said, "O son! You were born from my
heart, but you will not give your youth to me. Therefore, your offspring will have no share in the kingdom. O Tur-
vasu! O son! Take upon yourself this guilt and the consequent old age. I wish to enjoy pleasures with your youth.
When 1000 years have passed, I shall return your youth to you and take over the guilt and the consequent old age."

Turvasu replied, "O father! I do not desire old age. It destroys all desire, pleasure, strength, beauty, intelligence and
even life." Yayati said, "You were born from my heart, but will not give your youth to me. O Turvasu! Therefore,
your lineage will become extinct. O foolish one! You will be a king over subjects whose conduct and practices will
be impure. Women of superior birth will marry men of inferior birth. They will live on meat and lust after and cohabit with their preceptors' wives and animals. The evil ones will follow the conduct of animals and behave like
mlecchas." Thus did Yayati curse Turvasu, his son.

'Yayati then spoke to Sharmishtha's son Druhyu. "O Druhyu! For 1000 years, take over the old age that destroys
beauty and complexion. Give me your youth. When 1000 years have passed, I will return your youth to you and
take back the guilt and the consequent old age." Druhyu replied, "One who is old cannot enjoy elephants, chariots,
horses or women. Speech fails him. Therefore, I do not desire this old age." Yayati said, "You were born from my
heart, but will not give your youth to me. O Druhyu! Therefore, the most cherished of your desires will not come
true. You and your lineage will not be kings, but will have the title of 'Bhoja[This isn't clear at all. There was a kingdom of Bhoja in the Vidarbha or Malwa region. But why should that
be a curse? Or is this appellation a reference to people who were addicted to food (bhojana)?]' in a land where the only means
of transportation will be rafts, boats and swimming. O Anu! Accept my guilt and the consequent old age. I will
have your youth for 1000 years." Anu replied, "Those who are old eat like children, drooling and unclean at all
times of the day. They cannot pour offerings into the sacrificial fire at the right time. I do not wish for such an old
age." Yayati said, "You were born from my heart, but will not give your youth to me. Since you have described so
many faults associated with old age, old age will overcome you. Your offspring will be destroyed as soon as they
attain youth. You yourself will not be able to perform any sacrifices before the fire."

'Yayati said, "O Puru! You are my youngest and most beloved son. You will be the best among them. O son!
Old age, wrinkles and grey hair have overcome me, because of a curse imposed by Kavya Ushanas. But I am not
yet satiated with youth. O Puru! Accept my guilt and the consequent old age. I will enjoy pleasures for some time
with your youth. After 1000 years have passed, I will return your youth to you and accept back the guilt and the
consequent old age." Having been thus addressed by his father, Puru replied, "O great king! I will do what you
command me to do. O king! I will take upon myself the guilt and the consequent old age. Accept my youth and enjoy pleasures as you wish. I will live as you say, attacked by old age and deprived of youth and beauty. I will give
you my youth." Yayati said, "O Puru! O son! I am extremely pleased with you. Since I am pleased, I will grant you
this. Your offspring will rule the kingdom, be prosperous and accomplish all their desires."'
