Vaishampayana said, 'Bhishma, Shantanu's son, spoke these words to all the Kurus. O scorcher of enemies!
Then, Kouravya remained silent for a while. In due order, he held himself in different stages of dharana[In the eight-fold path of yoga, dharana is the stage of concentration.].
Having controlled his breath of life, the great-souled one propelled it upwards. In the midst of those great-souled
ones, an extraordinary event occurred. As Shantanu's son released it along different parts of his body, because of
being united with yoga, the wounds disappeared from those parts. While all of them looked on, in a short while, he
was completely free of wounds. O king! With Vasudeva at the forefront, all of them were astounded on seeing this
and that included all the sages, Vyasa and the others. He restrained his breath of life and controlled all the exits.
Therefore, it pierced the crown of his head and ascended towards heaven. O lord of men! Like a giant meteor, it
pierced Bhishma's head and emerged, penetrating the sky and instantly disappearing. O tiger among kings! Thus
did the king who was Shantanu's son, the extender of the Bharata lineage, himself give up this world.

'The great-souled Pandavas and Vidura collected many diverse kinds of wood and fragrances and prepared the
funeral  pyre.  Yuyutsu  and  the  other  Kouravas  looked  on.  Yudhishthira  and  the  extremely  intelligent  Vidura
wrapped Gangeya Kourava's body in silken cloth and covered it with garlands. Over it, Yuyutsu held aloft an excellent umbrella. Bhimasena and Arjuna fanned it with whisks. The sons of Madri held the headdresses. Bhishma
was the protector of the Kouravas and the extender of the Kuru lineage. On every side, the women stood around
with fans made of palm leaves and fanned the body. The great-souled one's funeral ceremony[If one translates literally, 'the sacrifice of a father' is more accurate than 'funeral ceremony'.] was performed according to the prescribed ordinances. Priests who knew the Sama Veda chanted Sama hymns. Sandalwood, yellow
fragrant wood, black aloe and fragrances were used in the pyre. Gangeya was covered in these and the fire was lit.
The kings, with Dhritarashtra at the forefront, stood on the right side of the pyre. Thus did the supreme ones of the
Kuru lineage perform the funeral rites of Gangeya, foremost among the Kurus. With large numbers of rishis, the
extenders of the Kuru lineage then went to the banks of the Bhagirathi. They were followed by Vyasa, Narada,
Asita, Krishna, the women of the Bharata lineage and the assembled citizens. Following the prescribed rites, the
best among the kshatriyas and all the people offered water to the great-souled Gangeya.

'When water was offered to her son, the goddess Bhagirathi herself arose from the water, weeping in grief.
Lamenting, she addressed the Kouravas. "O unblemished ones! I will tell you what has happened. Listen. He was
royal in conduct, with wisdom and a noble lineage. He honoured the elders among the Kurus, was devoted to his
father and was firm in his vows. On an earlier occasion, Rama, Jamadagni's son, could not defeat him[Described in Section 60 (Volume 5).]. He possessed divine weapons and was immensely valorous. He has now been slain by Shikhandi. O kings! There is no
doubt that the core of my heart is made out of stone. Though I can no longer see my beloved son, it has not yet
been shattered. For the svayamvara, all the kings and the kshatriyas assembled in the city of Kashi[For the princesses of Kashi, Amba, Ambika and Ambalika. This has been described in Section 60.]. On a single
chariot, he defeated all of them and abducted the maidens. There never has been strength like his on earth. Yet, on
hearing that he had been brought down by Shikhandi, my mind was not shattered. In Kurukshetra, the great-souled
one fought with Jamadagni's son. Despite his being brought down by Shikhandi, I am not greatly afflicted." In this
fashion, the great river lamented in many ways. The lord Damodara[Krishna.
 
 ] comforted her. "O fortunate one! Control
yourself. O  one who  is beautiful to see! You  should not grieve. There is no  doubt that your  son  has  obtained
supreme success. O beautiful one! He was one of the immensely energetic Vasus and was cursed. That is the reason he was born as a man. You should not sorrow. He followed the dharma of kshatriyas and fought in the field of
battle. He was brought down by Dhananjaya, not by Shikhandi. When Bhishma, tiger among the Kurus, was engaged in a great battle, no one was capable of bringing him down in that engagement, not even Shatakratu himself.
O one with the beautiful face! Your son is at ease and has gone to heaven. O best among rivers! Therefore, you
should not sorrow on account of that descendant of the Kuru lineage. O goddess! Be without anxiety. Your son has
gone and has become one of the Vasus." In this way, the best among rivers was addressed by Krishna and by
Vyasa. O great king! She abandoned her grief and controlled herself. All the kings, with Krishna at the forefront,
honoured the river. Having taken her permission, all the kings then returned.'

This concludes Bhishma-Svargarohana Parva and also concludes Anushasana Parva.