Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra's son joined his hands in salutation and spoke these words to Shantanu's son,
Bhishma, accompanied by all the lords of the earth. "When there is a war, without a general, even a large army is
destroyed like a nest of ants. The views of two leaders are rarely identical and they seek to rival each other in valour and fame. O immensely wise one! It is said that all the brahmanas once assembled together. They raised kusha
grass as flags and attacked the infinitely energetic Haihayas. O grandfather! They were followed by the vaishyas
and the shudras. The three varnas were on one side. On the other side, there were the bulls among the kshatriyas.
In that war, the three varnas were repulsed again and again. Though the kshatriyas were alone, they triumphed over
that giant army. O grandfather! The supreme among brahmanas asked the kshatriyas about this and the ones who
knew about dharma told them about the precise reason. 'In war, we listen to a single one who is immensely intelligent. All of you separately follow your own inclinations.' Then the brahmanas made a single brahmana their general. He was brave and skilled in policy and they defeated the kshatriyas. Those who choose a single skilled and
brave one, untainted and devoted to their welfare, as their general are victorious over the enemies in battle. You are
the equal of Ushanas[Shukracharya.]. You have always been my well-wisher. You cannot be led astray. You are established in
dharma. Become our general. You are like a sun to those who shine. You are like a moon to the herbs. You are like
Kubera to the yakshas. You are like Vasava to the Maruts. You are like Meru to the mountains. You are like Supar-
na[Garuda.] to the birds. You are like Kumara[Kartikeya.] to the demons[Bhutas.]. You are like the bearer of oblations[Agni.] to the Vasus. When we
are protected by you, like the residents of heaven are by Shakra, we will certainly be invincible, even to the thirty
gods. You march in front of us, like the son of the fire[Kartikeya is the son of the fire.] leads the gods. We will follow you, like cows follow a
bull."

'Bhishma replied, "O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is exactly as you say. However, you and the Pandavas are equal before me. O lord of men! I must speak about their welfare also. However, because I have pledged to do so, I must fight in your cause. I do not see any other warrior on earth who is my equal,
with the exception of that tiger among men, Kunti's son, Dhananjaya. He is mighty-armed. He knows all the divine
weapons. However, Pandava will never fight me openly in the war. In an instant, through the strength of my
weapons, I can make this entire universe destitute of men, gods, asuras and rakshasas. O lord of men! But Pandu's
sons cannot be slain by me. Therefore, I will always slay ten thousand warriors every day. O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! Unless they kill me first in an encounter, in this way, I will bring about their downfall. O king! There
is one condition under which I will willingly become your general, not otherwise. You should hear about this. O
lord of the earth! Let Karna or me fight first. This son of a suta always seeks to rival me in battle."

'Karna said, "O king! As long as Gangeya[Ganga's son, Bhishma.] is alive, I will never fight. I will fight with the one who wields the
Gandiva only after Bhishma has been killed."'

Vaishampayana said, 'In the prescribed way, Dhritarashtra's son then consecrated Bhishma, the giver of large
quantities of dakshina, as the general and he blazed forth. On the king's instructions, drums and conch shells were
sounded in hundreds and thousands. Eager men played musical instruments. There were many types of roars like
lions and the noise of mounts. A shower of blood and mud descended from the sky. There were storms and the
earth trembled. There was the sound of elephants trumpeting. All this made the minds of all the warriors downcast.
There were invisible voices. Meteors streaked through the sky. Jackals uttered fearful howls. The directions
seemed to blaze. O king! When the king consecrated Gangeya as the general, there were terrible portents in hundreds. After consecrating Bhishma, the destroyer of enemy forces, as the general, he[Duryodhana.] made the foremost of brahmanas recite and gave them a lot of cattle and gold. Strengthened by their benedictions and surrounded by his soldiers, he placed the son of the water in the forefront and marched out with his brothers. With a large army, he went
to Kurukshetra. With Karna, Kourava surveyed Kurushetra. O lord of men! He then set up camp in a level spot.
This region was pleasant and without salinity. There was plenty of fodder and kindling. The camp was as radiant as
Hastinapura itself.'
