'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! My mind is divided into two kinds of feelings, satisfaction and shame, on learning
that Subhadra's son routed the soldiers of my son[Satisfaction because Abhimanyu is Dhritarashtra's grandson.]. O son of Gavalgana! Tell me everything again in detail, about
how the young one sported, like Skanda against the asuras."

'Sanjaya replied, "I will tell you about that extremely terrible encounter that took place between one and many.
It was a tumultuous battle. Mounted on his chariot, Abhimanyu exerted himself. All the rathas[The word ratha means chariot, as well as great warrior, as compared to ordinary soldier. The context will make
clear what is meant. There were gradations in rathas, when used in the sense of warrior, and better ones were
known as maharathas and atirathas.] on your side
were the scorchers of enemies and happily exerted themselves. There were Drona, Karna, Kripa, Shalya, Drona's
son, Bhoja[Kritavarma.], Brihadbala, Duryodhana, Somadatta's son[Bhurishrava.], the immensely strong Shakuni, many kings, many
princes and many other soldiers. He roamed around like a circle of fire and pierced all of them with arrows. Subhadra's powerful son was the destroyer of enemies and skilled in supreme weapons. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! He exhibited his energy in all the directions. On witnessing the conduct of Subhadra's infinitely energetic
son, your soldiers trembled repeatedly. Bharadvaja's powerful and immensely wise son dilated his eyes in delight.
O venerable one! He quickly approached Kripa and addressed him, as if penetrating the inner organs of your
son[Because Duryodhana was ashamed.]. 'Abhimanyu, skilled in fighting, can be seen in the battle. Subhadra's youthful son has come here, ahead of
all the Parthas. He has caused delight to his well-wishers, all the kings, Yudhishthira, Nakula, Sahadeva, Pandava
Bhimasena, his relatives, his kin and all the other well-wishers who are neutral. I do not think there is any archer
who is equal to him in battle. If he so wishes, he can kill all these soldiers. But for some reason, he does not desire
that.' On hearing Drona's affectionate words, your son glanced smilingly at Drona. But he was enraged with Arjuna's son.'

'"Duryodhana spoke to Karna, Bahlika, Kripa, Duhshasana, the king of Madra and all the other maharathas.

'The preceptor, knowledgeable about the brahman, is at the forefront of all of us. But because of affection and
delusion, he does not wish to slay Arjuna's son. In a battle, no assailant can escape from him, even if it were to be
Death himself, not to speak of other mortals. I tell you this truthfully. He is protecting Arjuna's son, as if he is his
own student. Sons, students and the sons of students are always loved by those who follow dharma. Protected by
Drona, he thinks himself to be brave. Though he is proud of himself, he is stupid. Let us swiftly crush him.' Thus
addressed by the king, while Bharadvaja's son looked on, they rushed against Satvati's son[Satvatas are Yadavas. Abhimanyu's mother, Subhadra, belonged to the Yadava lineage.]. They were angry
and wished to kill him. On hearing Duryodhana's words, Duhshasana, tiger among the Kuru lineage, replied to
Duryodhana in these words. 'O great king! I tell you that I am going to kill him, while the sons of Pandu and the
Panchalas look on. I will devour Subhadra's son, like Rahu grasping the sun[Rahu is a demon who devours the sun (and the moon) and causes eclipses.].' He once again addressed the king
of the Kurus in these loud words. 'There is no doubt that, on hearing that Subhadra's son has been devoured by
me, the two Krishnas, who are extremely proud, will depart from the world of the living to the world of the dead.
On hearing that they have died, the sons who have been born in Pandu's field[In this context, field means wife. The Pandavas were born from both of Pandu's wives, Kunti and Madri.], together with all their well-wishers, will become impotent and will give up their lives on a single day. Therefore, if this one is killed, all your enemies, who wish you ill, will be destroyed. O king! Wish me well and I will slay this enemy of yours.' O king! Having spoken these words, your son, Duhshasana, was enraged and roared. He enveloped Subhadra's son with a
shower of arrows. Your son, the scorcher of enemies, descended on him. However, Abhimanyu pierced him with
twenty-six sharp arrows. Duhshasana became wrathful, like an elephant with shattered temples. He fought with
Abhimanyu, Subhadra's son, in that battle. The chariots circled in wonderful ways, to the left and to the right.
Those two warriors, skilled in the art of fighting with chariots, roamed around. Cymbals, drums, battle drums,
krikaras[There is a typo in the Critical text here. There is no musical instrument called krikara. It might be krakacha,
which is a kind of saw.], tambourines, kettledrums and jharjharas[Kind of drum.] were sounded. This loud noise mingled with the roar of the
men. It was like the roar of lions, mingling with din of the salty ocean."'
