'Droupadi said, "I have a duty to perform, an act that I had not performed earlier, because dragged through the
force of this powerful one, I had lost my senses. I offer my homage to all my superiors who are in this assembly of
Kurus. Let it not be my crime that I have not done this before."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Dragged with even greater force, the ascetic lady was even more miserable. She did not
deserve this. She fell down on the ground and lamented in the sabha.

'Droupadi said, "The assembled kings set their eyes on me in the arena of the svayamvara. Until being brought
to this sabha, I have never been seen by anyone since, anywhere. One who has earlier not seen the wind or the sun
in her house, has today been seen by this assembly of Kurus in the middle of the sabha. Earlier, the Pandavas have
not allowed the wind to touch me in my house. They now bear it when I am touched by this evil-hearted one. Time
has deviated. The Kurus permit their daughter and daughter-in-law, unworthy of such treatment, to be thus oppressed. Earlier, it has been heard that pure and chaste wives are not brought into the middle of a sabha. Where is
the dharma of the lords of the earth? According to dharma, it has earlier been heard that wives are not brought into
an assembly hall. That earlier eternal dharma has been lost among the Kouravas. How is it that the chaste wife of
the Pandus, the sister of Parshata's son[Parshata is Drupada and his son is Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi's brother.] and a friend to Vasudeva, has been brought into this assembly of kings?
O Kouravas! I am Dharmaraja's wife and I was born in the same varna as he. Tell me whether I am a slave or not a
slave, and I will act accordingly. O Kouravas! This mean one, the bringer of ill repute to the Kouravas, is firmly
molesting me and I cannot bear it any longer. O kings! O Kouravas! I want you to answer, whatever you might
think, and I will act accordingly. Have I been won or have I not been won?"

'Bhishma replied, "O fortunate one! I have already said that the course of dharma is supreme. Even the great-
souled brahmanas in this world are incapable of comprehending its course. When a powerful man uses force, that
is perceived as dharma by the world. But if a feeble one speaks about dharma, that is not regarded as dharma by
others. I am incapable of answering your question certainly. The issue is subtle, deep, complicated and important.
It is certain that all the Kurus have become addicted to avarice and delusion. Without a doubt, the destruction of
the lineage will occur soon. O fortunate one! The lineage into which you have been born and the one in which you
are established as a daughter-in-law, never deviates from the path of dharma, regardless of the disaster that might
befall. O Panchali! Since you look at dharma, even though you are suffering, it is conduct that you yourself follow.
Drona and the other elders, knowledgeable in dharma, sit here with lowered heads, as if their bodies are
hollow[The spirit or soul has departed from these bodies.]. It is my view that Yudhishthira is the supreme authority on the question. He should himself say
whether you have been won or have not been won."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The kings who were there were scared of Dhritarashtra's son. They said nothing, good or
bad, though they witnessed these many events and saw her crying, like a female osprey that has been hurt. On seeing that the sons and grandsons of the kings were silent, Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.] smiled and spoke these words to
the daughter of the king of Panchala, "O Yajnaseni! Let the question now be placed before the immensely powerful
Bhima, Arjuna, Sahadeva and your husband Nakula. Let them reply to your words. O Panchali! Let them declare
before all these aryas that Yudhishthira is not your lord. They must establish Dharmaraja as a liar[If Yudhishthira has been won and has no independent identity or property, he uttered a lie in staking
Droupadi. On the other hand, if Yudhishthira has not been won and has independent identity and property, he uttered a lie in staking himself. In either event, he is a liar.]. You will
then be freed from servitude. The great-souled son of Dharma is always established in dharma. He is the equal of
Indra. Let him himself declare whether he is your lord or not. When he has spoken, you must quickly decide whom
to love. All the Kouravas who are in this sabha are immersed in your affliction. Though they are aryas at heart,
they cannot appropriately resolve the issue. They therefore look to your husbands for an answer." Hearing these
words of the king of the Kurus, all those who were present in the assembly loudly applauded him. Some happily
waved their garments. But sounds of "alas" were also heard. On hearing these pleasant words, all the kings in the
assembly applauded the righteous act of the foremost among the Kurus. Turning their faces, all the kings looked at
Yudhishthira. He was learned in the principles of dharma. What would he say? What would Bibhatsu, the Pandava
who was undefeated in battle, say? What would Bhimasena and the twins say? They were curious and wondered.
When the noise had died down, Bhimasena grasped his large arms, smeared with sandalwood paste, and spoke.

"Had Dharmaraja Yudhishthira not been our superior and had he not been our lord of our lineage, we would not
have tolerated this. He owns the merit of our austerities and he is even the lord of our lives. If he considers himself
to have been won, then all of us have been won. But for that, no one who walks the ground of the earth with his
feet would have escaped with his life after touching Panchali's hair. Look at my long and round arms, like iron
clubs. Once inside them, not even Shatakratu can escape. But bound in the noose of dharma, out of respect for
him[Yudhishthira.] and restrained by Arjuna, I am not doing anything dreadful. If I am once freed by Dharmaraja, I will make
my arms perform the act of swords and kill these evil sons of Dhritarashtra, the way a lion kills small animals." At
that, Bhishma, Drona and Vidura spoke and said, "Restrain yourself. With you, everything is possible."'
