Janamejaya asked, 'Why did the illustrious Arshtishena torment himself through great austerities? How did Sindhudvipa become a brahmana? How did Devapi and the supreme Vishvamitra become brahmanas? O illustrious
one! Tell me all this. I am supremely curious.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! Earlier, in krita yuga, there was a supreme among brahmanas, known as Arshtishena. He always resided in the house of his preceptor and was always engaged in studying. O king! He always
lived in the house of his preceptor. O lord of the earth! But his learning of the Vedas never became complete. O
king! Depressed, the great ascetic tormented himself through austerities. Because of his austerities, he obtained the
supreme Vedas[That is, knowledge of the Vedas.]. The supreme among rishis obtained learning of the Vedas and attained success. The immensely
great ascetic granted three boons to that tirtha. "From today, a man who bathes in the tirtha on this great river[Sarasvati.],
will obtain all the fruits of a horse sacrifice. From today, there will be no fear here from predatory beasts[Alternatively, snakes.]. From a
little bit of effort, all the fruits will be obtained." Having spoken thus, the immensely energetic sage went to heaven. Thus did the illustrious and powerful Arshtishena attain success. O great king! In that tirtha, the powerful Sindhudvipa and Devapi obtained the exalted status of being a brahmana.

'O son[The word used is tata. This means son, but is affectionately used towards
anyone younger or junior.]! In that way, Koushika controlled his senses and always engaged in austerities. Severely tormenting
himself through austerities, he attained the status of a brahmana. There was a great kshatriya, famous everywhere
on earth by the name of Gadhi. O king! His son was the powerful Vishvamitra. O son! King Koushika performed a
great sacrifice[The use of the word Koushika causes a problem, since it is being used
for both Vishvamitra and his father. The entire family was descended
from Kusha. Vishvamitra's father was Gadhi. Hence, both Gadhi and
Vishvamitra are Koushika.] and obtained the immensely ascetic Vishvamitra as his son. Having decided to cast aside his body,
he decided to instate his son. The subjects bowed down and said, "O immensely wise one! Do not go. Save us
from a great fear." Having been thus addressed, Gadhi replied to the subjects, "My son will be the protector of the
entire universe." O king! Saying this and instating Vishvamitra, Gadhi went to heaven. Vishvamitra became the
king. However, despite making efforts, he could not protect the earth. The king heard that there was a great fear
from the rakshasas. With four kinds of forces, he went out of the city. Having gone a long distance, he reached Vasishtha's hermitage. O king! His soldiers created a lot of nuisance there. When the illustrious brahmana Vasishtha
returned to his hermitage, he saw that the entire large forest was being destroyed. O great king! Vasishtha, supreme
among sages, became angry at this. He instructed his cow to create a large number of terrible mountainous hunters.
Thus instructed, the cow created men who were terrible in form. From every direction, they clashed against those
soldiers and caused carnage. On seeing that the soldiers were driven away, Gadhi's son, Vishvamitra, made up his
mind that austerities were supreme. O king! He meditated in that supreme tirtha along the Sarasvati. He observed
vows and fasted. He emaciated his own body. He lived on water. He lived on air. He lived on leaves. He slept on
the bare ground and observed many other separate rules. The gods made many attempts to dislodge him from his
vows. But the great-souled one's mind never deviated from those rules. He made supreme efforts and tormented
himself through many kinds of austerities. In his energy, Gadhi's son became as radiant as the sun. When Vishvamitra was thus engaged in austerities, the grandfather, the granter of boons, thought that he would grant the immensely ascetic one a boon. O king! He asked for the boon that he might become a brahmana. Brahma, the grandfather of all the worlds, agreed. The immensely illustrious one thus became a brahmana through his fierce austerities. Successful in his objective, he roamed around the entire earth, like a god. O king! In that supreme tirtha,
Rama cheerfully gave away many riches, milk-yielding cows, carts, beds, garments, ornaments and the best of
food and drink to the best of brahmanas, after having worshipped them. O king! Rama then went to the hermitage
of Baka, which was not that far away. It has been heard that Dalbhya Baka tormented himself through fierce austerities there.'
