Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Tell me everything about the dharma associated with
garhasthya. O king! What must a man do to obtain prosperity in this world?"

'Bhishma replied, "O lord of men! In this connection, there is an ancient account. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! This is about a conversation between Vasudeva and the earth. The powerful Vasudeva praised the goddess
earth. O best among the Bharata lineage! He asked her what you have asked me.

'"Vasudeva said, 'Having resorted to the dharma of garhasthya, what acts should I undertake? O earth! What are
the necessary tasks? Which acts bring happiness?'

'"The earth replied, 'Rishis, ancestors, gods and humans must be worshipped through sacrifices. O Madhava!
Listen to me. The gods are always satisfied with sacrifices and humans with hospitality. One must always warmly
give them what deserves to be given. O Madhusudana! The large number of rishis is also delighted with this. Before eating, the householder must always tend to the sacrificial fire and offer the oblations. O Madhusudana! The
gods are pleased through these acts. For the sake of pleasing the ancestors, every day, he must perform the funeral
rites of offering food, water, roots and fruits. After having followed the prescribed ordinances and ignited the fire,
one must offer cooked food to the Vishvadevas. This must be offered to Agni, Soma and the Vishvadevas, and
thereafter, to Yama. Separate oblations are recommended for the Prajapatis. The oblations must be offered in the
due order. For Yama it is to the south, for Varuna it is to the west, for Soma it is to the north and for brahmanas, it
is in the centre of the house. O Madhava! For Dhanvantari it is to the north-east and for Shakra it is to the east. It is
said that men must be given offerings at the gate of the house. In the interior of the house, it is only the Maruts and
the gods who can be given offerings. The Vishvadevas should be given offerings under the open sky. The ones who
roam during the night and ghosts must be given offerings at night. After these offerings have been properly rendered, alms must be given to brahmanas. If no brahmanas are present, the first share of the offerings must be flung
into the fire. If a man wishes to donate at a funeral ceremony for the ancestors, there are rites he must perform after
the funeral ceremony has been concluded. Following the ordinances, the ancestors must be satisfied with the offerings. It is the turn of the Vishvadevas next. Thereafter, the brahmanas must be invited. The guests must next be
served the food that is left. O great king! When they are first honoured, men are pleased. A guest is said to be a
person who stays for a short period of time. A man must always submit to a preceptor, a father, a friend and a
guest, "This is what is available in my house today." A person who says this and does this is said to follow dharma.
O Krishna! A man who is a virtuous householder must always eat what is left after this. Even if they reside in his
house for an entire year, a man must honour and satisfy a king, an officiating priest, a snataka, a preceptor and a
father-in-law with madhuparka. In the morning and in the evening, it is recommended that food must be placed on
the ground for dogs, shvapakas and birds. This is known as an offering to the Vishvadevas. This is said to be dharma for  a person  who  follows garhasthya. Without  any  malice,  one  must  act  in  this  way.  One  will then obtain
supreme prosperity in this world. After death, one will obtain greatness in the vault of heaven.' Hearing the earth's
words, the powerful Vasudeva always acted in this way. You should also act accordingly. O lord of men! By following the dharma of a householder, you will obtain fame in this world and heaven after death."'
