Yudhishthira said, "These lords of the earth are lying down on the surface of the ground. Those immensely
strong ones have lost their lives in the midst of the armies. Each of them was terrible in strength, endowed
with the might of ten thousand elephants. In the battle, they have been slain by men who were their equals in energy and strength. In earlier times, I have not seen any others who could have killed these people in battle. They
were full of valour. They were full of energy and strength. O immensely wise one! Yet they are lying down here,
bereft of their lives. When they have lost their lives, the word 'dead' is used about them. These dead kings were
generally fierce in their valour. I have a doubt in this connection. Where do senses and death come from? Who
dies[The body or the atman?]? Where does death come from? Why do subjects on earth confront death and are borne away by it? O one
who is like the immortals! O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O son! In ancient times, in krita yuga, there was a king named Avikampaka. With his mounts
having been destroyed in a battle, he came under the subjugation of the enemy. His son was named Hari and he
was Narayana's equal in strength. However, with his army and his followers, he was slain in the battle by the enemy. Having come under the subjugation of the enemy, the king was overcome by sorrow, because of his son. Desiring peace, he roamed around on earth[He was defeated by the enemy, but was left free.] and saw Narada. The lord of men told him everything that had happened, about his being captured in the battle by the enemy and about his son's death. On hearing his words, Narada, the store of austerities, wished to dispel the sorrow on account of his son and told him an account. 'O king[Though the text does not explicitly state this, this is clearly a quote ascribed to Narada.]!
Listen to this extremely detailed account. O lord of the earth! I heard this account earlier. Engaged in the creation
of subjects, the immensely energetic grandfather[Brahma.] created a large number of subjects. They became extremely
old, but did not die, and generated offspring. O unblemished one! There was not the slightest bit of space that was
not covered with living beings. O king! The three worlds were covered with them and were unable to breathe. O
lord of the earth! He[Brahma.] then began to think about how they might be destroyed. However, though he thought about
it, he could not determine any reason for the destruction. O great king! From the fire of his rage, a fire arose out of
his body. O king! The grandfather burnt down all the directions with this. O king! The fire that resulted from the
illustrious one's anger burnt down heaven, earth, the firmament and the universe, with its mobile and immobile objects. When the great grandfather was enraged with the force of that great anger, living beings and immobile objects were certainly destroyed. Then  the  god  Sthanu  Shiva,  the  destroyer  of  enemy  heroes  and  the  lord  of  the
Vedas, the one who has tawny and matted hair, wanted to ensure a refuge for the universe and went to Brahma. For
the sake of the welfare of the subjects, Sthanu went to him. The blazing god, the granter of boons, spoke to Shiva.

"It is my view that you should get a boon from me. What is your desire? I will accomplish it today. O Shambhu! I
am the doer. I will ensure your pleasure and your growth."'"'
