'"Suparna said, 'O Galava! I have received instructions from the god who is the source of all knowledge. Tell me.
Towards which direction do you wish to go first-east, south, the western direction or the north? O foremost
among brahmanas! O Galava! Where will I go? The sun rises from the east and illuminates all the worlds. When it
is dawn, the austerities of the Sadhyas take place there. Intelligence was first born in the east and from there, permeated the entire universe. Dharma's two eyes are established there[Meaning the sun and the moon.]. Offerings are rendered through the mouth
there and the oblations spread to all the directions. O foremost among brahmanas! This is the gate through which
the day begins its journey. It is in the east that Daksha's women[Meaning Daksha's daughters, who were all married to Kashyapa and gave birth to different species.] gave birth to subjects. It is the direction where
Kashyapa's offspring prospered. This is the root of the prosperity of the gods and Shakra was instated in the kingdom of the gods there. O brahmana rishi! Even the gods performed austerities there. O brahmana! It is because of
these reasons that this direction is known as purva. In earlier times, this was the first region to be covered by the
gods[In addition to east, purva means first or foremost.]. All the ancient ones gaze upon the eastern direction. One who craves happiness, should perform all the
divine tasks in the eastern direction. The illustrious one who gives birth to the worlds[Brahma.], first chanted the Vedas
there. To those who know about the brahman, the sun god first recited the savitri here[The word savitri means several things. It is a sacred mantra from the Rig Veda. It is also the ceremony of investiture with the sacred thread.]. O supreme among brahmanas! The sun god bestowed the hymns of the Yajur Veda here. It was here that those gods, who had obtained the
required boon, earlier drank soma at sacrifices. The flame that bears oblations was satisfied here through objects
that have the same origin as itself[The reference is to liquid oblations (milk, clarified butter) and the fire originated in water.]. It is here that Varuna descended to Patala and obtained his prosperity. O bull
among brahmanas! It is here that the ancient Vasishtha's birth, rise to eminence and death took place. The first
sound of "Om" was created here, one thousand times. The sages who drink soma drank it near the altar here. It is
here that Shakra kills many boars and forest-dwelling beasts, as shares in the sacrifice for minor gods. The sun rises here and in his rage, kills all ungrateful men and asuras. This is the gate to the three worlds and to heaven and
happiness. This is the eastern quarter. If you so wish, let us go there. My task is to please the one[Vishnu.] whose instructions I obey. O Galava! Tell me, and I will go. Or listen to me about another direction.'"'
