'Markandeya said, "When he saw that the infinitely energetic brothers had fallen down, Ravana's son bound them
down with arrows obtained through a boon. Those brave ones, tigers among men, were bound down by Indrajit's
arrows in battle, like birds trapped in a cage. On seeing them fallen down on the ground, covered in hundreds of
arrows, Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, stood around them with all the other monkeys-Sushena, Mainda,
Dvivida, Kumuda, Angada, Hanuman, Nila, Tara and Nala. Vibhishana, accomplished in his deeds, arrived at the
spot. He brought the brave ones back to consciousness with the weapon known as prajna[Prajna means intelligence or wisdom.]. Using the great herb
vishalya[Vishalya means freedom from trouble or anxiety and more specifically, something that removes a stake or a
thorn.], invoked with a divine mantra, Sugriva removed the thorns of arrows from their bodies. With the arrows removed from their bodies, those foremost among men recovered their senses. In a short while, the maharathas were freed from pain and fatigue. O Partha! Seeing that Rama was freed of his fever, Vibhishana joined
his hands in salutation and told the descendant of the Ikshvaku lineage, 'O destroyer of enemies! This guhyaka has
arrived here from Mount Shveta. He has brought this water on the instructions of the king of the yakshas[The word used is Rajaraja.]. O
scorcher of enemies! The great king Kubera has sent this water so that you are able to see invisible beings. When
this water has touched your eyes, you, and whoever else you give the water to, will be able to see all beings that
are invisible.' Having agreed to this, Rama accepted the consecrated water and purified his eyes with it. So did the
great-minded Lakshmana, Sugriva, Jambavan, Hanuman, Angada, Mainda, Dvivida, Nila and almost all the chiefs
among monkeys.

'"Having accomplished his task, Indrajit went and told his father what he had done. Having told him this, he returned to the field of battle. Desirous of battle, he angrily advanced again. With Vibhishana's advice, Soumitri attacked him. He was flush with victory and had not yet performed his daily rites[Indrajit had not performed his daily rites and was therefore weak.]. Having recovered his senses,
Lakshmana was desirous of killing the enemy and angrily assailed him with arrows. Each warrior wished to vanquish the other and a battle began between them. It was extremely extraordinary, like that between Shakra and
Prahlada. Indrajit pierced Soumitri with sharp arrows that penetrated the heart. Soumitri wounded Ravana's son
with arrows that were like fire to the touch. Touched by Soumitri's arrows, Ravana's son was senseless with rage.
He discharged eight arrows at Lakshmana, virulent as serpents. But listen carefully as I tell you how the brave
Soumitri killed the other one with three feathered arrows that were like fire to the touch. Through one of these, he
sliced off the arm that wielded the bow from the body. With the second one, he dropped the arm that held the iron
arrows on the ground. The third arrow was lustrous and wide. With this, he cut off the head, which had a beautiful
nose and was adorned with earrings. Severed of the head and the arms, the torso looked terrible. Having killed
him, the supreme among strong ones, killed his charioteer with arrows. The horses dragged the chariot to Lanka
and Ravana saw the chariot, bereft of his son. Knowing that his son had been killed, Ravana was overcome by
grief and his eyes widened in fear. He was about to kill Vaidehi. She was in the ashoka grove, yearning to see
Rama. The evil-souled one grasped a sword and rushed to her. Listen. Seeing that the one with evil intelligence
had decided on this evil act, Avindhya calmed down the enraged one, giving him these reasons. 'You are established as a great king. You should not kill a woman. This woman is captive in your house and is already dead. In
my view, she will not be killed through the destruction of her body. Kill her husband. When he is dead, she will be
dead. Shatakratu is not your equal in valour. In battle, you have frightened Indra and the thirty gods several times.'

With these and similar words, Avindhya pacified the angry Ravana and he accepted the advice. The stalker of the
night resolved to march out himself. Having sheathed his sword, he instructed that his chariot should be
prepared."'
