Vaishampayana said, 'With words that were like amrita, Vidura dispelled the sorrow of Vichitravirya's son, the
bull among men. Listen to what he said.

'Vidura said, "O king! Arise. Why are you lying there? Get a grip on yourself. This is the final outcome[Death.] of
everything that is mortal-mobile and immobile. Everything that is stored is dissipated. Everything that rises falls
down again. Everything that is united is separated again. Death is the end of life. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O bull among kshatriyas! Since Yama attracts both those who are brave and those who are cowards, why
should these kshatriyas not fight? A man who does not fight-dies. A man who fights-lives. O great king! When
one's time has come, no one can transgress it. O king! You should not grieve over those who have been killed in
the battle. If the sacred texts are proof, they have attained the supreme objective. All of them studied. All of them
observed the vows. All of them were destroyed when they were headed forwards[That is, they were not retreating.]. What is there to sorrow over?
They were generated from beyond your sight[Before they were born.]. They have again gone beyond your sight. They were not yours.
You are not theirs. What is there to sorrow over? A person who is killed obtains heaven. A person who kills obtains fame. Both of these possess many qualities. There is no failure in battle. Indra will create worlds that will satisfy their desires. O bull among men! They will become Indra's guests. Mortals do not go to heaven through sacrifices that are rich in donations, austerities or learning. Brave ones go there by being slain in battle. Beings go
through thousands of mothers and fathers and hundreds of wives and sons[In successive births.]. Whom do they belong to? Whom do
we belong to? From one day to another, those who are stupid face thousands of reasons for sorrow and hundreds of
reasons for fear, but not those who are learned. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! There is no one who is loved
by time, nor anyone time hates. Time looks upon everyone neutrally and everyone is dragged away by time. Life,
beauty, youth and stores of riches are temporary and this is also true of good health and consorting with those one
loves. A learned person is not interested in these. One should not sorrow over something that affects the entire
country and not a single person alone[That is, death.]. If something no longer exists, it will have no return. If one sees some
powerful antidote to sorrow, one can act. But if there is no medicine against sorrow, one should not think about it.
It does not abandon someone who is thinking. Instead, it only becomes stronger. Because they confront something
they do not like and because they are separated from something they like, men of limited intelligence are united
with mental grief. There is no artha, dharma or happiness that will result from your sorrowing. As long as one has
tasks to accomplish, one should not deviate from those objectives[In this context, dharma, artha and happiness, not dharma, artha and kama.]. In particular, men who achieve one kind of
prosperity and then another, and continue to be dissatisfied, are confused. The learned are satisfied. Mental sorrow
is dispelled through wisdom and physical suffering through medicines. That is the capacity of knowledge. One
should not become the equal of a child. When a man lies down, his earlier deeds lie down next to him. When he
stands, they stand next to him. When he runs, they run with him. In whichever state one performs a deed, good or
bad, in exactly that state the fruits of that deed are obtained[The meaning of this shloka is not very clear.]."'