'Shishupala said, "You are old and you defile your lineage. You try to frighten all these kings with your threats.
Are you not ashamed? You are supreme among all the Kurus. But since you live in the third state[This is a reference to Bhishma's vow of celibacy. By the third state, Bhishma is being called an eunuch.], it is but appropriate that you should offer advice that runs counter to dharma. O Bhishma! With you at the forefront, it is but natural that the Kouravas should be like a boat tied to a boat, or like a blind man following the blind. You have once
again injured our minds by specially recounting this one's deeds, such as the killing of Putana[Ogress killed by Krishna.] and so on. O
Bhishma! You are arrogant and stupid. If you wish to praise Keshava, why does your tongue not splinter into a
hundred parts? O Bhishma! You are supposed to be old in wisdom. Yet you wish to praise a cowherd. His evil repute is recounted by even those who are like children among men[That is, those who are childlike in intelligence.]. O Bhishma! If he killed a vulture[Putana assumed the form of a vulture.] when he
was a child, what is extraordinary? Ashva and Vrishabha[Demons killed by Krishna. Keshi was in the form of a horse (ashva) and Arishta was in the form of a bull
(vrishabha).] weren't skilled in the art of war. O Bhishma! What is
extraordinary if he kicked down an inanimate wooden cart with his foot[One of Krishna's feats as a baby. He was asleep under the cart.]? O Bhishma! It is my view that there
was nothing remarkable in holding up Govardhana mountain for a week[Krishna held up the mountain to provide shelter from the pouring rain.]. It was nothing but an anthill. O Bhishma! When we hear from you that he ate great quantities of food while sporting on a mountain top, we are astonished even more. You are knowledgeable in dharma. What can be more extraordinary than killing the greatly
strong Kamsa, whose food he had partaken? O Bhishma! O wretch of the Kuru lineage! You do not know dharma.
I will now tell you the words of the righteous ones, since you do not seem to have heard them.

'"O Bhishma! Righteous, honest and virtuous ones have always instructed us, that in this world, one should not
use weapons against women, cattle, brahmanas, those whose food has been partaken and those who seek refuge. It
seems all this has been wasted on you. You speak to me about Keshava, praising him as old in wisdom, old and superior. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Do I not know anything? O Bhishma! How does the killer of a cow[Vrishabha.],
and the killer of a woman[Putana.], deserve praise? 'He is foremost among all intelligent ones.' 'He is the lord of this
universe.' Hearing these words of yours, Janardana believes them to be true. But it is certain that all this is false.
Even if a raconteur sings praises many times, those praises aren't praise for the raconteur. Like bhulingas[A bird that lives off carrion. It picks out bits of meat from the mouths of predators.] and
vultures, every being acts according to its nature. There is no doubt that your nature is vile. The Pandavas think
Krishna deserves worship. They must also be evil. You show them the path. You speak of dharma. But though you
know about dharma, you have strayed from that path. O Bhishma! Which learned one, with dharma in his heart
and supreme among all learned ones, will act as you have, ignoring the precepts of dharma?

'"O Bhishma! If you think you know dharma and think yourself to be wise in intelligence, why did you abduct
the maiden Amba? She desired someone else. Your brother Vichitravirya followed the path indicated by the righteous ones. That king did not accept the maiden you had abducted. He is the one on whose wives others had to
beget children[This is a reference to Dvaipayana fathering Dhritarashtra and Pandu.]. You believe yourself to be wise. But in your sight, others fathered offspring. That is not the path
of the righteous. O Bhishma! Where is your dharma? Your brahmacharya is in vain. There is no doubt that you uphold it as a result of delusion or impotency. I do not see you as one who knows dharma. I do not see you prospering. You have not served the old[Bhishma has not served his ancestors, because he did not have a son.], or those who speak of dharma. Offerings, alms, studying and sacrifices characterized by a lot of dakshina-these are not worth a sixteenth of what is obtained through a son. O Bhishma! Whatever is obtained through many vows and fasts certainly goes in vain if one does not have a son. You do not have
offspring. You are old. You utter false words in the name of dharma. Like the swan in the story, you will now be
killed by your own relatives.

'"O Bhishma! Learned men in ancient times told this story. So that you can hear, I will now recount it completely. In ancient times, an old swan lived near the ocean. He always spoke of dharma and instructed the birds. But his
conduct was otherwise. 'Practise dharma and avoid evil.' These were the words the birds heard from that ex-
pounder of dharma. O Bhishma! For the sake of dharma, the other birds brought him food, creatures that lived in
the sea[Fish.]. O Bhishma! Those birds also left all their eggs with him and then roamed in the waters of the sea. But
the evil one ate all those eggs. That swan was always attentive to his own interests, while the others were negligent. He ate all the eggs of others. When the number of eggs declined, an extremely intelligent one[Another bird.] was suspicious and kept a watch on him. Having witnessed the swan's evil act, the bird was extremely unhappy and spoke
about it to all the other birds. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Those birds assembled. When they witnessed it
themselves, they killed the untruthful swan. O Bhishma! Since your conduct is like that of the swan, these angry
lords of the earth will kill you, like the birds killed the swan. O Bhishma! O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Men who know the ancient tales sing a song about this. I will repeat it for you exactly. 'O one who rides on the
chariot of wings! Your act of eating the eggs contradicts your words. You will be killed in anger, because your soul
shows your falsehood.'"'
