'Sanjaya said, "O Indra among kings! You have asked me about the valour of the king of Sindhu. I will tell you
everything, in detail, about how he fought with the sons of Pandu. Listen. There were well-trained horses from the
Sindhu region, controlled by the charioteer. They were large and as fleet as the wind. These bore him. His chariot,
constructed in the appropriate way, was like a city of the gandharvas. It was radiant with a standard that bore the
mark of a large and silver-coloured boar. There was a white umbrella and pennants, with fans and whisks. These
were the marks of a king. And he was as resplendent as the lord of the stars[The moon.] in the firmament. The bumper on his
chariot was made out of iron and was decorated with pearls, diamonds, gems and gold. It was as dazzling as luminous bodies in the sky. He extended his great bow and released many arrows, filling up those parts that Arjuna's
son shattered[The sense is that Abhimanyu created breaches in the Kourava army and Jayadratha filled these breaches up.]. He pierced Satyaki with three arrows and Vrikodara with eight, Dhrishtadyumna with sixty and
Virata with ten arrows, Drupada with five sharp arrows and Shikhandi with ten, the Kekayas with twenty-five and
Droupadi's sons with three arrows each. He pierced Yudhishthira with seventy and mangled all others with a great
net of arrows. It was extraordinary.

'"The powerful king, Dharma's son, smiled. He fixed a sharp and yellow broad-headed arrow and used this to
slice down his bow[That is, Yudhishthira severed Jayadratha's bow.]. But he took up another bow in the twinkling of an eye and pierced Partha[Jayadratha pierced Yudhishthira.] with ten arrows, piercing the others with three each. On realizing his dexterity, Bhima again used three broad-headed arrows
and severed his bow, standard and umbrella, so that they were swiftly brought down on the ground. O venerable
one! The powerful one strung another bow and brought down Bhima's standard, bow and horses. With his horses
slain and his bow severed, he descended from his chariot and climbed onto Satyaki's chariot, like a lion jumping
onto the summit of a mountain. On witnessing this honourable and supreme deed on the part of the king of Sindhu,
those on your side were delighted and shouted repeatedly in appreciation. All the beings honoured this deed,
whereby he countered the enraged Pandavas alone, through the energy of his weapons. Subhadra's son had created
a route earlier, by slaughtering many warriors and elephants. But Saindhava restrained the armoured Pandus from
that path. The brave Matsyas, Panchalas and Kekayas made every endeavour. So did the Pandavas. But they could
not withstand Saindhava. Everyone who tried to penetrate Drona's array was checked by Saindhava, as a consequence of the boon that he had obtained from the god."'
