'Markandeya said, "On hearing that Kumbhakarna with his followers, the great archer Prahasta and the immensely
energetic Dhumraksha had been killed in battle, Ravana spoke to his son, the brave Indrajit. 'O destroyer of enemies! Kill Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana. O good son! You have earned a blazing renown for me by vanquishing
in battle Shachi's consort, the thousand-eyed one and the wielder of the vajra[Indra. Indrajit was originally named Meghanada and came to be called Indrajit because he vanquished Indra
in battle. Indrajit could remain invisible while fighting and also possessed many celestial weapons.]. O destroyer of enemies! O
supreme among those who wield weapons! Remain invisible or visible. Use the divine weapons obtained as boons.
Kill my enemies. O unblemished one! Not to speak of the others, even Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva are incapable of withstanding the touch of your arrows. O unblemished one! O mighty-armed one! Even Prahasta and
Kumbhakarna could not complete the task of avenging Khara. Go and accomplish that in battle. Using your sharp
arrows, kill my enemies and their soldiers today. O son! Increase my delight, as you have done in the past by making Vasava captive.' O king! Having heard these words, Indrajit agreed. He donned his armour and mounted on his
chariot, made his way towards the battlefield.

'"The bull among rakshasas then announced his name and challenged Lakshmana, who bore auspicious signs, to
a duel. Lakshmana grasped his bow and arrows and slapping the palms of his hands, rushed forward, creating terror, like a lion among small animals. A terrible and fierce battle started between those two, both of whom desired
victory, were skilled in use of divine weapons and defied each other in prowess. When Ravana's son, supreme
among strong ones, could not get the better of his adversary through arrows, he tried harder. With great force, he
hurled many javelins at him. But Soumitri sliced those down with his sharp arrows. Cut down with those sharp arrows, they fell down on the ground. Then Vali's illustrious son, Angada, uprooted a tree and rushing at Indrajit
with great force, struck him on the head with it. However, the brave Indrajit was unperturbed. He grasped a lance
and hurled it at his chest. But Lakshmana cut it down. The brave Angada was near him and Ravana's son struck
the bull among monkeys on the side with a club. Vali's brave son ignored the blow. The one who was victorious
over his enemies wrathfully hurled the trunk of a shala tree at Indrajit. O Partha! That tree, angrily hurled for the
purpose of killing Indrajit, destroyed his chariot, together with the horses and the charioteer. With the horses and
the charioteer dead, he jumped down from the chariot. O king! Ravana's son instantly disappeared through the use
of maya. Knowing that the rakshasa was skilled in many forms of maya and could become invisible, Rama arrived
at that spot to protect his army. He then aimed his arrows, obtained through boons, at Rama and pierced the immensely strong Lakshmana all over his body. The brave Rama and Lakshmana fought with Ravana's son, who remained invisible through the use of maya and fought them with his arrows. In great anger, he unleashed hundreds
and thousands of arrows at all the limbs of those lions among men. On seeing that he was invisible while showering down arrows, the monkeys grasped large rocks and took to the sky. However, the rakshasa was invisible. Ravana's brave son used maya and oppressed them severely with his arrows. Struck by the arrows, the two brave
brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, fell down from the sky to the ground, like the sun and the moon."'
