Uma said, "You have separately described for me the sacred dharma that the four varnas must observe for
their benefit. O illustrious one! But tell me about the dharma that pervades everything."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "The creator and ordainer of the worlds desired qualities and created brahmanas for saving the worlds. Among all the mortals on earth, they are regarded as gods. I will tell you about their rites of dharma
and the resultant fruits. The dharma of brahmanas is said to be the supreme dharma. For sustaining the worlds,
Svayambhu created three kinds of dharma. Whenever the earth is recreated, these are created. Listen to them. The
dharma cited in the Vedas is supreme, the ones in the sacred texts known as the smritis come next. After that, it is
said to be virtuous conduct. These three types of dharma are eternal. A brahmana should know the three Vedas[The Rig Veda, Sama Veda and Yajur Veda.],
but he should not earn a living through studies. A person who performs the three rites, overcomes the three and is a
friend to everyone is said to be a brahmana[The three rites are donations, studying and performing sacrifices. The three things to be overcome are greed,
anger and desire.]. The lord of the worlds has decreed that brahmanas can perform six
acts for making a living. Hear with single-minded attention. Studying, teaching, donating gifts, receiving gifts, performing sacrifices and officiating at the sacrifices of others-these six acts are in conformity with dharma for a
brahmana. Continuous studying is dharma. Sacrifices represent eternal dharma. According to capacity and according to the ordinances, gifts are praised. This is supreme dharma and the virtuous are always devoted to this. In this
way, pure householders can accumulate great stores of dharma. A person who performs the five sacrifices[Studying, worshipping the gods, worshipping the ancestors, feeding humans and feeding other living creatures.],  is
pure in soul, is truthful in speech, is without malice, donates, treats brahmanas well, lives in clean houses, is without insolence and is always upright, is pleasant in speech, is devoted to welcoming guests, eats leftovers and lawfully offers padya, arghya, a seat, a bed, a lamp and refuge to a guest-is regarded as someone who follows dharma. One must wake in the morning and perform ablutions, then invite the guests to eat. One must treat them well,
before allowing them to leave. This is eternal dharma. Day and night, to the best of one's capacity, one must tend
to guests and pursue the three objectives. The dharma of shudras is said to be service towards the other three varnas. It has been ordained that the dharma of a householder has the attributes of pravritti. This is auspicious and
beneficial towards all beings and I will recount this. According to one's capacity, one must donate. One must perform sacrifices in the same way. One must follow the acts for sustenance and one must desire one's own prosperity.
Wealth must be earned through dharma. The riches earned through dharma must be divided into three parts. In all
tasks, a man must make efforts to follow supreme dharma. A person who desires his own prosperity must set aside
one part for the pursuit of dharma. Another part is for the pursuit of kama. The third part is set aside for increasing
the riches. Another kind of dharma is said to be the pursuit of moksha and this has the attributes of nivritti. O goddess! I will describe this kind of conduct to you. Listen to the truth. This dharma is compassion towards all beings.
One should not reside in the same village for more than one night. For someone who craves for moksha, the act of
freeing oneself from the bonds of hope is praised. There should be no attachment towards the water pot, water,
clothes, seats, the triple staff, beds, fire, or the place one has sought refuge in. Such a person's mind and consciousness is turned towards adhyatma. He is always attached to yoga and sankhya. He seeks shelter under a tree. He
finds refuge in an empty house. He lies down along the banks of rivers. He loves the banks of rivers. A person who
is freed from all kinds of attachment and all bonds of affection is a brahmana. A person who has the sentiments of
merging his own self with his atman is a brahmana. He is as immobile as a pillar. He abstains from food. All his
acts are driven towards moksha. He  wanders  around, attached only to such  things. This is eternal dharma. He
dwells alone. He is without attachment. He cannot be seen in the same village for more than one night. He is not
tied to any place of residence. He is free. He does not sleep on the same bank of a river for more than one night.
The learned say that this is the dharma of moksha. This is the virtuous path of the righteous, mentioned in the
Vedas. A person who follows this path leaves no footprints behind him. There are four kinds of mendicants-kutichara, kritodaka, hamsa and paramahamsa[It is best not to try to translate these. A kutichara is someone who is deceitful in conduct. A kritodaka is someone who has offered oblations of water. Hamsa is a term used for an ascetic and paramahamsa.]. Among these, the one that follows is superior to the preceding
one. There is nothing superior, inferior or equal to the last[The state of paramahamsa.]. There is nothing before it or after it. Such a person is
tranquil, without happiness or unhappiness. He is without change, without old age and without death."

'"'Uma said, "You have spoken about householders, the dharma of moksha and the conduct of virtuous people.
In the mortal world, these paths are beneficial and great. O one who knows about dharma! I wish to know about
the supreme dharma followed by the rishis. I have always been attached to those who reside in hermitages. A fragrant smoke rises from the ghee offered as oblations and seems to spread throughout the hermitage. O Mahesh-
vara! My mind is always delighted at seeing them. O god! O lord! I have a doubt about the dharma followed by
sages. O one who knows about the truth about all kinds of dharma! O god of the gods! Tell me about this. O Mahadeva! Explain to me everything about what I have asked you."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "I will tell you about the supreme dharma followed by the sages. O beautiful one! Observing their own austerities, the sages progress towards success. O immensely fortunate one! O one who knows
about dharma! Listen to the dharma observed by the rishis who always know about dharma. They are the Phenapas
and their dharma is to subsist on foam[Phena is froth or foam.]. In heaven, Brahma drank some sweet amrita and some sacred foam was
released  from  what  Brahma  had  drunk.  The  pure  stores  of  austerities  who  subsist  on  this  are  known  as  the
Phenapas. Now hear about the large numbers of Valakhilyas who tread along the path of dharma. The Valakhilya
sages have obtained success through their austeries and reside in the solar disc. There are also those who know
about dharma and follow the conduct of birds. They wish to observe unchha. They dress themselves in skins cast
off by deer. They are attired in hides and rags. The Valakhilyas, stores of austerities, are beyond the opposite pairs
of sentiments and progress along the virtuous path. They are each as long as a thumb and they reside in their own
respective places, desiring to perform austerities. The fruits of their dharma are great. They are as revered as the
gods. They ensure success in the tasks meant for the gods. They have burnt down all their sins through their austerities and illuminate the directions. There are others who are pure in their minds and are devoted to the dharma of
compassion. These virtuous and auspicious ones are Chakracharas[Those who roam around in circles.] and they roam around in Soma's world. The
Samprakshalas, the Ashmakuttas and the Dantolukhalinas reside near the world of the ancestors and following the
ordinances, resort to unchha[Samprakshalas wash their vessels every day, so that nothing is saved for the next day. Ashmakuttas are those
who only eat grain pounded by stone. Dantolukhalinas use their teeth for grinding the grain.]. There are others who drink soma, like the gods. Still others subsist on heat. Resorting to unchha, they are present there and naturally restrain their senses. They offer oblations into the fire and worship the ancestors and the gods. They perform the five sacrifices and these sacrifices are said to constitute their
dharma. O goddess! These are the Chakrachara brahmanas who roam around in the world of the gods. Other kinds
of dharma are also practised by the rishis. Hear about those. All those who follow the dharma of rishis conquer
their atmans and control their senses. After this, it is my view that desire and anger must be conquered. The sacrifices known as agnihotra and dharmaratri must be performed and so must sacrifices with oblations of soma. Dakshina must be given at the five sacrifices. Always observing the rites of sacrifices and devotion towards worshipping the ancestors and the gods constitute dharma. Through what has been obtained by practising unchha, one
must tend to the guests. One must refrain from enjoying beauty and control the addiction towards milk. One must
lie down on the bare ground. One must practise yoga. One must eat herbs and leaves. One must eat fruits, roots,
wind, water and moss. These are the rituals practised by the rishis. Through these, they obtain the destinations
meant for those who have renounced. When there is no smoke from a house, when the pestle has been laid down,
when the fire has been extinguished, when residents have eaten, when the vessels have been put away, when mendicants have ceased to solicit alms and when there are no guests waiting-that is when a person must eat whatever
food is left. A person who is devoted to this dharma of the truth and is forgiving follows the dharma of a sage. He
is not arrogant. He is not proud. He is not distracted. He is not astounded. He treats friends and enemies equally.
He is friendly towards everyone and knows about supreme dharma."'"'
