'Gandhari said, "O Madhava! Look at my one hundred sons. They were never exhausted in a battle. In the battle,
most of them were killed by Bhimasena's club. But there is something that is causing a greater grief to me now.
With their sons slain, my young daughters-in-law are running around with dishevelled hair. Their ornamented feet
used to roam around on the terraces of palaces earlier and must touch the ground, wet with blood, now. As they are
whirling and roaming around, crazy and tormented by grief, they are scattering vultures, jackals and crows. There
is another one there, unblemished in her limbs. Her waist can be encircled by the hands. On seeing this terrible
sight, she is miserable and has fallen down. O mighty-armed one! My mind can no longer find peace after I have
seen the princess, Lakshmana's mother, the daughter of a king. Some see their brothers, others see their husbands
and sons slain, lying down on the ground. On seeing that they have fallen down, they are grasping their arms with
their own beautiful arms. O unvanquished one! There are middle-aged women and aged ones. With their relatives
killed in the terrible clash, they are weeping. Listen. O immensely strong one! Exhausted and confused, they are
clinging onto the seats of chariots and the slain bodies of elephants and horses. O Krishna! Behold. There is another one who has picked up the head of her relative, severed from his body. It is beautiful, has an excellent nose and
is decorated with earrings. O unblemished one! I think that their crimes in their earlier lives must have been severe.
And I, possessing limited intelligence, must have done the same as well. O Janardana! That is the reason we are
being repaid by Dharmaraja[This Dharmaraja does not mean Yudhishthira. It means Yama.]. O Varshneya! Good and evil deeds can never be destroyed. O Krishna! Look at
them. They are in the best of ages. They possess beautiful breasts and stomachs. They have been born in noble lineages. They are modest. Their eyelashes, eyes and hair are dark. Confused by sorrow and grief, they are gaggling
like a gaggle of geese. O Madhava! They are shrieking like cranes and are falling down. O Pundarikaksha! The
faces of these women are like blooming lotuses. Their faces are perfect and the sun's sharp rays are hurting them.
O Vasudeva! My sons were as proud as crazy elephants, and jealous. Ordinary men are now looking at the women
from the inner quarters[Avarodhana, the inner or women's quarters of a palace, where the royal
ladies resided.]. The shields are marked with the signs of one hundred moons. The standards have the
complexion of the sun. The armour is golden. The breast-plates are made out of gold. O Govinda! Behold the blazing helmets of my sons as they lie down on the ground. They are like fires into which oblations have been offered.
Duhshasana is lying down here, brought down by the brave Bhimasena, the slayer of enemies, with a club that
killed heroes. His limbs are drenched with the blood that has been drunk. O Madhava! At the time when Droupadi
was afflicted by the gambling, she had urged him on and he[Bhima.] remembered that[The incidents described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. O Janardana! To please his
brother and Karna, when Panchali was won over by the dice in the assembly hall, he[Duhshasana.] had spoken harsh words to
her and to Sahadeva, Nakula and Arjuna. 'O Panchali! You are our servant and our wife. Quickly enter our house.'

O Krishna! At that time, I had spoken to King Duryodhana. 'O son! Shakuni has been grasped by the noose of
death. Abandon him. O extremely stupid one! Understand that your maternal uncle loves a conflict. O son! Swiftly
abandon him and make peace with the Pandavas. O extremely stupid one! You do not comprehend. Bhimasena is
intolerant. The sharp words that you have spoken are like inflicting iron arrows and flaming torches on an elephant.' However, he[This probably means Duryodhana, but could also mean Duhshasana.] was cruel and proud and struck with words that were like stakes. He released his poison,
like a snake towards bulls. Duhshasana is lying down here, stretching out his arms. He has been killed by Bhimasena, like a giant bull by a lion. Bhimasena was extremely intolerant and did something that was extremely
gruesome. In the battle, he angrily drank Duhshasana's blood."'
