Yudhishthira asked, "O king! You always worship brahmanas who are rigid in their vows. O  lord of  men!
What do you see as the outcome of those acts of revering them? O one who is great in vows! What do you
see as the prosperity obtained from worshipping brahmanas? O mighty-armed one! Tell me everything about worshipping them."

'Bhishma replied, "This Keshava, extremely intelligent, will tell you everything about the prosperity obtained
from worshipping brahmanas and about the prosperity that has been seen from observing great vows. My strength,
hearing, speech, mind, years and knowledge are no longer as pure as they used to be. I do not think that there is a
great deal of time left for me to give up my body. The sun seems to move very slowly. The dharma for brahmanas,
kshatriyas and vaishyas, as stated in the great Puranas, and the rods of chastisement that have been laid down in
the Puranas, have been stated by me. O Partha! Let Krishna instruct you about what remains. I know the truth
about Krishna and about his ancient strength. O Indra among Kouravas! Keshava is immeasurable in his soul. He
will speak to you about doubts on dharma. Krishna created the earth, the sky and heaven. Terrible in his strength,
he is the ancient boar. The firmament, heaven, the four directions and the four sub-directions are subservient to
him. Everything in this ancient universe was created by him and originates in him. He is without a sense of ownership. A lotus was generated from his navel and the infinitely energetic Svayambhu emerged from that. O Partha! It
is he who dispelled that terrible darkness which pervaded the primeval ocean. He existed in the form of all the
dharma in krita yuga. In treta yuga, he existed in the form of knowledge. O Partha! In dvapara yuga, Krishna exists
in the form of strength. In kali yuga, he will be on earth in the form of adharma. He is the god who slew the daityas
earlier. He is the ancient god who became an emperor. He is the creator of beings. He is the creator of future beings. He is the protector of the world and the universe. When dharma suffers, Krishna is born among gods and
men. Cleansed in his soul and based on dharma, he establishes the superior and the inferior worlds. Sparing those
who should be spared, he slays the asuras. O Partha! He is good and bad deeds and their reason. The god does
what needs to be done. He is also what will be done. Again, know that he is Soma and Shakra. He is Vishvakarma.
He is the one who has the universe as his form. He brings prosperity to the universe. He is the one who destroys
the universe. He wields the trident. He is covered in blood. He is fierce. He is known by his deeds and everyone
praises him. The gandharvas, the apsaras and hundreds of gods always worship him. The rakshasas bear him. He is
the bringer of prosperity. He alone is the victorious one. He is honoured and praised in the sacrifices. He is praised
in the rathantara hymns of the Sama Veda. The brahmanas praise him in mantras about the brahman. It is to him
that the officiating priests offer oblations. He is the ancient Brahma, shrouded in mystery. O foremost among the
Bharatas! He is seen in the great sacrifices. He is the one who is fierce in deeds, the savior of cattle[This can be understood generally. However, there is a specific instance where Indra showered down and
Krishna saved the cattle by holding up the Govardhana mountain.]. He is the
one who agitates the daityas and the danavas and those who are devoted to them. He is the one to whom the many
kinds of food are given. He is the one to whom the horses and the mounts are rendered. He is the one who protects
earth and heaven. Everything is under the eternal one's subjugation. He is the ancient one whose seed fell into the
pot. The rishi Vasishtha is said to have originated from that. He is the wind god. He is the powerful Ashvins. He is
the rays of the sun. He is the first god. All the asuras were defeated by him. In three steps, he conquered them with
his valour[This is a reference to Vishnu's dwarf incarnation.]. He exists in gods, men and the ancestors. Those who know about sacrifices speak of him as abundance. He is the one who rises in the morning and divides time. He is the two ayanas of uttarayana and dakshinayana. His rays move upwards, downwards and diagonally and heat the earth. He is the one who is praised by
brahmanas who know about the Vedas. It is from him that the sun obtains its radiance. From one month to another
month, he is the one who is sanctified in sacrifices. Those who know about the Vedas recite his name at sacrifices.
He is like a single wheel with three naves, borne by seven horses in the three worlds[The single wheel is clearly the year and the seven horses are yoked to the sun's chariot. The three naves (trinabhi) is probably a pun on Vishnu's name of Trinabha, meaning someone whose navel supports the three worlds.]. He is immensely energetic. He goes everywhere. He is the one who is supremely powerful. Krishna alone holds up the worlds. He is the
food. He is the devourer. He is the patient one. O Partha! Krishna is always the doer. Once, in the form of deadwood, the great-souled lord satisfied the fire god[The text actually says the one with smoke in his trails, meaning Agni, the fire god.] in Khandava. He vanquished the rakshasas and those who
were devoted to them. He goes everywhere. He is all the fires to whom libations are offered. He is the single horse
from whom all the white horses originated. He is the single horse which led to all the horses being created. His
chariot has three seats for the driver and three wheels. It has three kinds of motion and four horses[All of these leave scope for interpretation. The three can mean three worlds, the past, the present and the future,
or sattva, rajas and tamas. It can also mean good deeds, bad deeds and mixed deeds. The three kinds of motion
can be upwards, downwards and diagonal. The four horses can mean time, destiny, divine will and human will.]. He is the
refuge of the five elements. The earth, the firmament and heaven are in him, though he is without a sense of ownership. Hrishikesha, the infinitely resplendent one, as energetic as the fire, created these beautiful mountains. The
wielder of the vajra crossed the waters in an attempt to cause him violence and strike him, but was repulsed. The
great Indra praises him in great sacrifices. The brahmanas speak about the ancient one in thousands of hymns from
the Rig Veda. No one other than him was capable of hosting the immensely energetic Durvasa in his house. He is
spoken of as the single and ancient rishi. He is immersed in adhyatma and he is the creator of the universe. He is
the original god who makes the Vedas known. He is the one who follows the ancient rituals. He is Vishvaksena.
All the objects of desire, everything in the Vedas and all the fruits desired in the world flow from him. He is the
white light in all the worlds. He is the three guardians of the worlds in the three worlds. He is the three fires. He is
the three kinds of speech[More accurately, the three kinds of utterers of speech. This probably means the three classes of priests (excluding those associated with the Atharva Veda) involved in sacrifices.]. Devaki's son is all the gods together. He is the year. He is the seasons. He is the fortnights. He is day. He is night. He is kala and kashtha. He is matra, muhurta, lava and kshana[As has been mentioned earlier, all of these are small measurements of time.]. Vishvaksena is in
all of these. He is the moon and the sun. He is the planets, the nakshatras and the stars. He is everything that can be
seen on the night of the full moon. O Partha! He is the conjunction of the nakshatras and the seasons. All of these
are created out of Vishvaksena. The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Ashvins, the Sadhyas, the Vishvadevas, the
large number of Maruts, Prajapati, Aditi, the mother of the gods and the saptarshis-all of them are in Krishna. He
becomes the wind and agitates the universe. He becomes the fire and burns the universe. His form is the universe.
He becomes water and submerges everything. He becomes Brahma and creates the large numbers in the universe.
He learns everything that is in the Vedas. But he is the Vedas. He follows the ordinances. But he is the ordinances.
He is dharma, the Vedas and strength. Know that Keshava is everything mobile and immobile. He manifests himself as supreme light. He is the radiance that is in front of us. In his form as the universe, he illuminates everything.
From his own self, he first created water and then everything else in the universe. He is the origin of the wonderful
and varied seasons. He is the clouds and lightning and everything else. He is Airavata. Everything mobile and immobile is Krishna. He is famous in the universe. Know him to be Vishnu. He is the abode of the universe. He is devoid of qualities. He is Vasudeva. As life in creatures, he is Samkarshana and is worshipped. He is Pradyumna. He
is Aniruddha in his fourth form[The four forms of Vishnu are Vasudeva, Samkarshana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.]. From his own self, the great-souled one manifested himself to us in these
forms. Desiring to create this universe with its five kinds of beings[A reference to the five categories of anna-maya, prana-maya, mana-maya, vijnana-maya and ananda-maya.], he divided himself into five elements. O
Partha! He thus created earth, wind, space, light and water. He created mobile and immobile objects and the four
kinds of beings[Born from wombs, born from eggs, born from sweat and plants and trees.]. He created the earth and sowed the five kinds of seed[Interpreted as the four kinds of creatures and their acts.]. He created the firmament, so that it
could shower down on earth. O king! He created the universe. It is he who created all creatures from his own self.
The lord of creatures always desires to create and brought together everything-the gods, the asuras, men, the
worlds, the rishis, the ancestors and the subjects. Know that everything good and bad, mobile and immobile-
flows from Vishvaksena. Everything that exists and everything that will exist-know that everything flows from
Keshava. When it is time for creatures to die and the time of destruction presents itself, it is Krishna who is the
eternal and direct conveyor of dharma. Know that every creature in the universe and everything else originates in
Vishvaksena. Everything that is praised in this world, everything auspicious, everything good and bad is Keshava,
who is himself inconceivable. There is no reason to hold an opposite view. Keshava is like this. He is Svayambhu.
He is the supreme and undecaying Narayana. He is the beginning and the end of all creatures and he is also their
middle. The universe vests in him."'
