Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then they all went to Dhritarashtra and
asked about the king's welfare, and the king asked about them in return. A cowherd named Samanga had been instructed earlier. He approached Dhritarashtra and told him about the cattle that were nearby. O lord of the earth!
Then Radheya[The son of Radha, Karna.] and Shakuni spoke to Dhritarashtra, lord of men and the foremost among kings. "O Kourava!
The ghoshas are in beautiful regions. The right time for branding the calves has arrived. O king! This is also an excellent time for your son to go on a hunt. Therefore, you should give Duryodhana permission to go." Dhritarashtra
replied, "O son! Hunting and inspecting of cattle are worthy tasks. I remember that one should not trust cowherds
completely. But I have heard that those tigers among men[The Pandavas.] are somewhere near. Therefore, I do not think that you
should go there yourself. They were vanquished through deceit and now live in that great forest in misery. O Rad-
heya! Those maharathas are capable and are always engaged in austerities. Dharmaraja is never angered. But Bhimasena is prone to anger. Yajnasena's daughter[Droupadi.] is also full of fire. Full of insolence and delusion, you are certain
to commit a transgression and they will burn you down with the power of their austerities. Or the brave and armed
ones may be overcome with anger. With swords that are girded and with energetic weapons, they will burn you
down. Even if you succeed in harming them through force of numbers, that will not be the act of an arya. But I do
not think this to be possible. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya has lived in Indra's world. Having obtained celestial
weapons, he has returned to the forest. In earlier times, when he had not obtained these weapons, Bibhatsu[Arjuna.] had
conquered the earth. Having obtained the weapons, why should the maharatha not be able to kill you now? If you
listen to my words once you have gone there, even then, there will be reason for anxiety and it will be a sojourn of
unhappiness. Some soldiers of yours may cause injury to Yudhishthira. Even if the act has not been intended, the
sin will be ascribed to you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Therefore, let skilled men go there for the branding. I do not like the idea of your going there yourself." Shakuni said, "The eldest Pandava is learned in dharma.
He has taken an oath in the assembly hall that he will live in the forest for twelve years. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! All the Pandavas follow him and are devoted to dharma. Kounteya Yudhishthira will never exhibit anger towards us. We are extremely desirous of going out on a hunt. We also wish to do the numbering[The numbering and branding of the cattle.]. We
have no desire to see the Pandavas. There will be no conduct there that does not befit an arya. We will not go to the
place that they have sought refuge in." Having been thus addressed by Shakuni, Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, reluctantly gave Duryodhana permission to go, together with his advisers.

'Having obtained permission, Gandhari's son[Duryodhana.], foremost among the Bharatas, left with a large army, together
with Karna, Duhshasana and Shakuni the dice player, and surrounded by his other brothers and thousands of
women. When the mighty-armed one departed to see Lake Dvaitavana, all the citizens, together with their wives,
followed him to the forest. There were eight thousand chariots, thirty thousand elephants, many thousands of infantry and nine thousand horses, carriages, shopping carts, whores, traders, bards and men who were skilled in
hunting, in hundreds and thousands. O lord of the earth! The departure of the king raised a mighty roar, like the
deep rumble of the winds during the rainy season. While headed towards Lake Dvaitavana, with all his mounts,
King Duryodhana camped at a distance of one gavyuti[From the lake. A gavyuti is a measure of distance, equal to two kroshas (four miles) or one krosha (two
miles).].'