Janamejaya asked, 'Our ancestor Yayati was tenth in the line from Prajapati. How did he obtain Shukra's
daughter[Devayani.], who was difficult to obtain? O supreme among Brahmanas! I wish to hear this in detail. Also tell me
separately and in detail the accounts of the chiefs of the Puru lineage.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Yayati was a rajarshi who was as radiant as the king of the gods himself. I
will answer your question and tell you how, in ancient times, Shukra and Vrishaparva gave him their daughters and
how the union between Devayani and Nahusha's son Yayati took place. Many years ago, a great fight occurred between the gods and the demons over who would rule over the three worlds, with all their movable and immovable
riches. In a desire to obtain victory, the gods appointed the son of Angirasa[Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods.], who was a sage, as the priest for
their sacrifices. The others[The demons. That is, the demons also had a priest for the same purpose.] appointed the wise Ushanas[Ushanas is another name for Shukra or Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons. The text has the word
kavya, which has been translated as wise. However, Kavya is also another name for Shukra and Kavya is the son
of Kavi.]. These two Brahmanas were bitter rivals. The gods
killed all the demons who had assembled for battle. But they were revived by Kavya with his knowledge. Having
thus been brought to life, they fought with the gods again. In turn, the demons killed many gods in battle. However, though immensely learned, Brihaspati could not revive them. He did not possess the knowledge known as sanji-
vani[The knowledge of bringing the dead back to life.] that the valorous Kavya possessed. Thus, the gods were immersed in supreme misery.

'In great anxiety and afraid of Kavya Ushanas, the gods went to Brihaspati's eldest son Kacha and said, "Worship us as we worship you. Please help us in this supreme task. That Brahmana with unlimited energy possesses
knowledge. Quickly bring us that knowledge from Shukra and you will have a share in all sacrificial offerings
made to us. You will find the Brahmana with Vrishaparva[The king of the demons.]. He always protects the demons, but does not protect
those who are not demons. You are younger than him. Therefore, you can worship that wise one. You can also pay
homage to Devayani, the beloved daughter of that great-souled one. You alone are capable. There is no one else.
You are certain to obtain the knowledge by propitiating Devayani with your conduct, magnanimity, sweetness, action and self-control." Having been thus honoured and addressed by the gods, Kacha, Brihaspati's son, agreed. He
then went to Vrishaparva.

'O king! Having been thus sent by the gods, he soon arrived at the capital of the king of the demons. On seeing
Shukra there, he said, "O illustrious one! Please accept me as your disciple. I am the grandson of Angirasa and the
son of Brihaspati. I am known by the name of Kacha. Accepting you as my supreme preceptor, I will practise brahmacharya for a thousand years. Therefore, allow me." Shukra replied, "O Kacha! You are extremely welcome and
I will accept your words. You deserve respect and I will treat you with respect. Because, by doing that, Brihaspati
will also be honoured." Shukra Ushanas, the son of Kavi, commanded Kacha to take the vow and he did so. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Accepting the vow and the duration of the vow, as he had promised, he began to
worship his preceptor and Devayani. The young man was at the peak of his youth and pleased Devayani with his
constant worship, singing, dancing and the playing of musical instruments. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Devayani was a maiden who had just attained the bloom of her youth and he pleased her through his conduct and
offerings of flowers and fruit. The Brahmana rigidly stuck to his vows and when they were alone, Devayani also
sang with him and sported with him. Five hundred years passed in this fashion and Kacha stuck to his vows. Then
the danavas came to know that he was Kacha.

'One day, they saw him alone in the forest when he was tending to the cattle. Without hesitation, out of hatred
for Brihaspati and in a desire to protect the knowledge, they killed him. After killing him, they chopped him up
into pieces as small as sesamum seeds and fed it to jackals and wolves. The cows returned home without the
cowherd. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Devayani saw that the cows had returned home from the forest without Kacha, she immediately said, "O lord! The sun has set and the agnihotra fire[Sacrificial fire kindled in the evening. Presumably, this was Kacha's task.] has not yet been lit.
The cows have returned without the cowherd and Kacha is not to be seen. O father! It is certain that Kacha must
have died or been killed. I tell you truthfully that I cannot live without him." Shukra replied, "If he is dead, I will
revive him by uttering the words: 'Come back to life'." With the aid of the knowledge of sanjivani, he summoned
Kacha. Having been thus summoned, Kacha joyfully reappeared. When the Brahmana's daughter asked him, he
said that he had been killed. On another occasion, at Devayani's request, the Brahmana Kacha again went to the
forest to collect flowers. The danavas saw him and killed him a second time. The asuras burnt him, ground the ashes and mixed them with wine, feeding this to the Brahmana[Shukra.].Devayani again spoke to her father, "O father!
Kacha was sent to gather flowers. But he cannot be seen." Shukra replied, "O daughter! Kacha is Brihaspati's son
and he has gone to the land of the dead. Though revived by my knowledge, he has again been killed. What shall I
do? O Devayani! Do not grieve and do not weep. Someone like you should not grieve over a mortal man. The gods
and the entire world must accept that which comes." Devayani said, "The oldest Angirasa is his grandfather. Brihaspati, blessed with the power of austerities, is his father. He is the son and the grandson of a rishi. Why should I
not grieve and weep? He himself is a brahmachari blessed with the power of austerities. He is always attentive and
skilled in every work. I will happily follow the path that Kacha has trod on. O father! I love the handsome Kacha."

Shukra replied, "It is certain that the asuras hate me. They have killed my innocent disciple. These terrible danavas
want to make me a non-Brahmana. The killing of a Brahmana oppresses Indra himself. Let this evil come to an
end now." Having been spurred by Devayani, maharshi Kavya again summoned Kacha, Brihaspati's son.

'Summoned by the knowledge, but scared about his preceptor's safety, Kacha softly replied from inside the
stomach. Shukra then asked him, "O Brahmana! How did you come to be inside my stomach? Tell me truly."

Kacha replied, "Through your grace, my memory has remained with me. I remember exactly what happened and
how and can therefore bear this unending misery and insufferable pain. O Kavya! The asuras killed me. They burnt
me and ground and mixed the ashes with wine, which they then gave you. But when you are there, how can the
asuras' powers of delusion overcome the powers of a Brahmana?" Shukra said, "O daughter! How can I now do
what is dear to you? Kacha can only be brought to life through my death. O Devayani! Kacha is inside me. He can
only reappear by ripping my stomach apart." Devayani said, "Both the sorrows will burn me like fire-your destruction and Kacha's. I will have no protection after Kacha's death. And if you die, I will not be able to bear life."

Shukra replied, "O Brihaspati's son! You have attained success, since Devayani worships you so much. Unless you
are Indra in Kacha's disguise, accept today the knowledge of bringing the dead back to life. No one can emerge
alive from my stomach, but a Brahmana cannot be killed. Therefore, accept the knowledge I give you. Return to
life as my son. O son! Possessed of the knowledge that I give you, bring me back to life after I leave my body.
When you emerge from my stomach with the knowledge your preceptor gives you, act in accordance with
dharma." Receiving the knowledge from his preceptor, the Brahmana emerged from the stomach. The handsome
Kacha emerged from the Brahmana's right side, like the full moon in shuklapaksha[The brighter half of the lunar month.]. He saw his preceptor's remains, lying in a heap of Brahmana powers. Kacha revived him with the secret knowledge he had received.

'Then Kacha paid homage to his preceptor and said, "The preceptor is an object of worship. The giver of knowledge is supreme. He is the most precious of all precious objects in the four directions. He who doesn't revere him
is never established and goes to the worlds of the evil." Having been deceived through drinking wine and remembering the terrible consequences of losing consciousness, and also seeing the reappearance of the handsome Kacha
whom he had drunk when intoxicated with wine, the mighty Kavya arose in anger. He wished to bring about the
welfare of Brahmanas. The illustrious one himself spoke this injunction against the drinking of wine. "From this
day, if a stupid Brahmana commits the crime of drinking wine, he will be considered to have committed the crime
of killing a Brahmana. He will be hated in this world and the next. I am laying down this dharma for Brahmanas in
all the worlds. Let this be heard by good Brahmanas who worship their preceptors, by the gods and by all the
worlds." Having said this, the illustrious repository of immeasurable ascetic powers summoned the danavas, who
had been deprived of their senses by destiny. Having summoned them, he said, "O danavas! You are strong. But
know that Kacha has obtained his wish and will live with me. Having obtained the great knowledge of sanjivani,
the Brahmana is now as powerful as Brahma himself." Kacha lived for a thousand years in his preceptor's house.
With his preceptor's permission, he then prepared to return to the land of the thirty gods.'
