'Sanjaya said, "When that army of elephants was destroyed, your son, Duryodhana, instructed all the soldiers to
kill Bhimasena. On your son's instructions, all the soldiers uttered terrible roars and rushed against Bhimasena.
That large army was incapable of being assailed, even by the gods. It was as difficult to cross as the turbulent
ocean, on the night of the new or full moon. It was full of chariots, horses and elephants. There was the sound of
conch shells. There were a large number of kings in it and it was incapable of being agitated. As it advanced, Bhimasena stationed himself in the battle, against a large ocean. He was like the shore, withstanding that ocean of soldiers. O king! In that battle, we faithfully witnessed Bhimasena's wonderful, extraordinary and superhuman deed.
Without any hesitation, Bhimasena countered all those kings, horses, chariots and elephants with his club. That
supreme of charioteers used his club to check that large army. Bhima stood immobile in that melee, like Mount
Meru. At that extremely tumultuous and supremely dreadful time, his brothers, his sons, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna,
Droupadi's sons, Abhimanyu and maharatha Shikhandi did not abandon Bhimasena, because of the fear that was
engendered from that great force.

'"He[Bhima.] grasped a heavy and great club that was made of steel[The text uses the word shaikyayasa. This should be translated as steel. However, it is also possible to break up
the word into shaikya and ayasa and thus translate it as sharp iron.] and rushed against your soldiers, like Death
with a staff in his hand. The lord smashed large numbers of chariots and large numbers of horses. Bhima wandered
around in that battle, like the fire of destruction at the end of a yuga. He killed everyone in that encounter, like the
lord of death at the end of a yuga. Pandava crushed large numbers of chariots with the force of his thighs. He was
like a crazy elephant and all of them were like reeds before an elephant. He brought down charioteers from chariots and elephant-riders from elephants. He brought down horse-riders from the backs of horses and crushed infantry on the ground. With the dead bodies of men, elephants and horses, the field of battle looked like the abode
of the dead. He was like Rudra with the Pinaka, destroying animals in his anger. With the terrible and destructive
club, which made a sound like Indra's vajra, Bhimasena looked like Yama, with a staff in his hand. The great-
souled Kounteya whirled his club and assumed an extremely terrible form, like death at the time of the destruction
of a yuga. He repeatedly shattered that large army. He was seen to be like death himself and all of them became
dispirited. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Wherever Pandava cast his eye, with his club upraised, all the soldiers there seemed to vanish. He shattered the soldiers and was unvanquished by the army. He devoured the soldiers, like the destroyer with a gaping mouth. He grasped the great club and performed terrible deeds there.

'"On seeing Vrikodara thus, Bhishma swiftly advanced towards him. He was on a giant chariot with the radiance
of the sun and it roared like the clouds. He enveloped everything with a shower of arrows, like clouds showering
down rain. On seeing Bhishma advance, like the destroyer with a gaping mouth, the mighty-armed and intolerant
Bhima rushed towards him. At that instant, Satyaki, the brave descendant of the Shini lineage, devoted to the truth,
attacked the grandfather. He began to kill the enemy with his firm bow and made the soldiers of your son tremble.
He was borne on silver steeds and unleashed arrows from his firm bow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Among all those on your side, there was no second one capable of withstanding him[The exception being Alambusa, or more likely, Bhurishrava.]. Alambusa, seated on a
supreme king of elephants, pierced him with sharp and terrible arrows. But Shini's brave grandson pierced him
with four arrows and advanced on his chariot. On seeing the foremost of the Vrishni lineage thus advancing, circling in the midst of the enemy, repeatedly repulsing the bulls among the Kuru lineage and roaring, no one, not
even the best, was capable of withstanding him. He tormented like the midday sun. O king! With the exception of
Somadatta's son, there was no one there who was not cheerless. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing
that all the charioteers on his side had been routed, Bhurishrava, Somadatta's son, grasped a terrible and powerful
bow and advanced, desiring to fight with Satyaki."'
