Vaishampayana said, 'At that time[The critical edition excises a shloka that says night was over.], there was a tremendous sound in the sky, created by all the musical instruments of the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was the sound of chariot wheels and the tolling of
bells. The cries of beasts of prey, animals and all kinds of birds resounded everywhere. The king of the gods, the
destroyer of enemies, arrived, accompanied by gandharvas and apsaras on all sides, all riding vimanas that were
like the sun. Purandara, the king of the gods, blazing in his supreme radiance, went up to the Parthas in a chariot
that roared like the clouds, was adorned with gold and was drawn by tawny horses. Having arrived, the god with
the thousand eyes descended. As soon as he saw that great-souled one, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, together with his
brothers, approached that handsome king of the gods. The one who was generous in his gifts worshipped the one
whose soul was infinite[Yudhishthira and Indra respectively.], in accordance with the appropriate honours and the decreed rituals. The energetic
Dhananjaya bowed in obeisance before Purandara and before the king of the gods, remained prone like a servant.
The immensely energetic Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, saw Dhananjaya, his head bowed in humility. The king of the
gods was extremely delighted on seeing Phalguna and inhaled the fragrance of his matted head, cleansed through
austerities. The king[Yudhishthira.] rejoiced in his heart and was overcome with delight.

'Purandara, the wise king of the gods, spoke to him. "O king! O Pandava! You will rule the earth. O Kounteya!
Be fortunate. Return again to the hermitage of Kamyaka. O king! Having performed deeds that brought me pleasure, Pandava Dhananjaya has obtained all the weapons from me. No one in the worlds is capable of vanquishing
him now." Having spoken these words to Kunti's son Yudhishthira, and having been worshipped by the maharshis,
the one with the thousand eyes happily returned to heaven. The learned and controlled one who observes brahmacharya for a year, restrained and rigid in his vows, and studies this account of the meeting between the Pandavas and Shakra in the abode of the lord of riches, will never face obstructions and will live happily for a hundred
autumns.'
