Janamejaya said, 'O you who are knowledgeable about the nature of the brahman! You have recounted to me the
excellent and superhuman story of the human origins of the sons of Dhritarashtra. O Brahmana! In accordance
with birth, you have also told me their names. Now I wish to hear about the Pandavas. They were great-souled and
the equal of the king of the gods in valour. You have earlier told me that they were the partial incarnations of the
gods themselves[This is a reference to Section 6, Adi-vamshavatarana Parva.].O Vaishampayana! I now wish to hear about their origins and their superhuman deeds. Please
tell me all.'

Vaishampayana said, 'One day, in the great forest frequented by deer and predatory beasts, King Pandu saw a
stag that was the leader of its herd mating with a doe. With five swift and sharp arrows that were decorated with
golden feathers in their shafts, Pandu shot both the stag and the doe. O king! The stag was actually the immensely
energetic son of a rishi, blessed with the power of austerities. The energetic one was uniting with his wife in the
form of a deer. While still united with the doe, he fell down on the ground instantly and as he began to lose his
senses, lamented in a human voice.

'The deer said, "Even evil men who are enslaved by lust and anger, are therefore deprived of reason and are always sinful, stay away from such cruel deeds. A man's judgement does not swallow destiny. Destiny swallows
judgement. The wise never sanction anything that is forbidden by destiny. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
You were born in a dynasty that was always devoted to dharma. Overcome by lust and avarice, how have you lost
all your reason?" Pandu replied, "O deer! In dealing with deer, kings behave no differently from enemies; they kill
them. Therefore, you should not blame me in your delusion. Deer can be killed openly and through trickery. That
is the dharma of kings. Since you know that, why are you blaming me? When seated at a sacrifice, the rishi
Agastya went on a hunt. He offered each deer in that great forest to all the gods. This is the sanction of dharma.
Then why are you reproving me? According to Agastya's actions, the likes of you are offerings at sacrifices." The
deer said, "Earlier, they never unleashed arrows without considering preparedness[Meaning that the enemy was unprepared.]. There is a time for this and
killing at such times is praised." Pandu replied, "It is known that killing occurs, whether prepared or unprepared,
through different means-strength and sharp arrows. O deer! Why are you blaming me?"

'The deer said, "O king! I do not blame you because you have killed a deer or because you have caused me injury. But instead of performing such a cruel act, you should have waited until my act of intercourse was complete.
This is a time that is for the welfare of all beings and desired by all beings. Which learned one will kill a deer engaged in intercourse in the forest? You have rendered futile my attempt to obtain offspring. O Kourava! O Pourava! This lineage has had rishis and is famous for its righteous acts. This act was unworthy of you. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! This greatly cruel act is condemned in all the worlds. It destroys attainment of heaven and
fame and is against dharma. You are acquainted about pleasures from uniting with women. You also know the sacred texts and norms of dharma. You are the equal of a god. You should not have committed such an act, which is
unworthy of reaching heaven. O best of kings! Your duty is to punish men who act cruelly, are engaged in evil acts
and have abandoned the three[Dharma, artha and kama.] goals. O best of men! O king! What have I done that you killed me? I am a sage
in the form of a deer and live on roots and fruit. I always live peacefully in the forest. Since you have caused injury
to me, you will certainly be injured. Since you have been cruel to a helpless couple, when you are overcome
through the pangs of desire, death will overtake you. I am a sage named Kimdama, unparalleled in austerities.
Ashamed of men, I was engaged in intercourse with this deer. Assuming the form of a deer, I roamed with other
deer in this dense forest. The sin of killing a Brahmana will not vest on you, since you did that unknowingly. O
foolish one! But since you killed me in the form of a deer when I was overcome by desire, you will meet with the
same fate that has befallen me. Overcome by desire, when you unite with your loved one, at that very instant, you
will depart for the land of the dead. The woman with whom you unite in your last moments will also go to the land
of the king of the dead, inescapable for all beings. Out of devotion towards you, that best of intelligent ones will
follow you. You have now brought me into grief when I was in the midst of pleasure. Like that, you will be afflicted with misery when you have just found happiness." Having said this, in great pain, the deer gave up its life. In an
instant, Pandu was also immersed in grief.'
