Vaishampayana said, 'The night was spent in that hermitage, performing auspicious deeds. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The conjunction of the nakshatras was auspicious and the night passed. Here and there, there
were conversations, with the attributes of dharma and artha. There were citations from many sacred texts, with
colourful words and syllables. O lord among men! Having cast aside their extremely expensive beds, the Pandavas
slept on the ground, near their mother. Whatever the great-minded King Dhritarashtra ate, that is what those brave
ones among men ate, spending the night there. When night was over, with his brothers, Kounteya performed the
morning ablutions and took a look at the area around the hermitage. With Dhritarashtra's permission, he roamed
around wherever he wished, with the women from the inner quarters, the servants and the priests. He saw the sacrificial altars, with fires blazing. Many sages had consecrated themselves there and were offering oblations into the
fires. There were wild flowers from the region and the smoke rose upwards. There were handsome brahmanas and
large numbers of sages. There were herds of deer there and these were completely at ease. O lords! Large numbers
of birds were without any fear and were singing. There were peacocks, blue jays, warbling gallinules and melodious cuckoos. These auspicious notes were pleasant to hear. Some places echoed with the sounds of brahmanas
studying. In other spots, there were huge piles of fruits and roots that had been gathered. The king gave the ascetics
riches,  golden  and  silver  pots  and  the  wood  of  fig  trees.  The  king  gave  them  hides,  woolen  cloth,  ladles  and
spoons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king also gave them water pots, plates, pots for boiling, iron
containers and many other kinds of vessels. Everyone accepted as much as he desired. The king, with dharma in
his soul, toured the entire area of the hermitage. Having given away many kinds of riches to everyone, the king returned again.

'He went and met the learned King Dhritarashtra, who had performed his ablutions and was seated at ease, together with Gandhari. His mother stood not very far away, bowing down like a disciple. The one with dharma in
his soul saw Kunti, who had always followed dharma. He worshipped the king and announced himself to the king.
Having been asked to sit, he then seated himself on a mat made out of grass. Bhimasena and the other Pandavas,
bulls among the Kouravas, also honoured the king and commanded by him, sat down. Surrounded by them, the
Kourava king was radiant. He blazed in the prosperity of the brahman, like Brihaspati amidst the gods. When they
were seated, the maharshis approached. There were also Shatayupa and the others, the residents of Kurukshetra.
The illustrious and extremely energetic brahmana, Vyasa, worshipped by large numbers of devarshis and surrounded by his disciples, showed himself before the king. King Kouravya, Kunti's valiant son, and Bhimasena and the
others arose and worshipped him. Vyasa, surrounded by Shatayupa and the others, approached and addressed King
Dhritarashtra. There was an extensive mat made out of kusha grass and it was covered with black antelope skin
and kusha grass on top. This had been prepared for Vyasa and it was offered to him. When he was seated, they
took Dvaipayana's permission and seated themselves on mats around the immensely energetic one.'
