'"Vidula said, 'If you wish to give up your manliness in your present state, you will soon follow the path travelled
by the inferior. A kshatriya who does not display energy to the best of his capacity and who does not exhibit his
valour, desiring to remain alive, is said to be a thief. My meaningful, appropriate and beneficial words do not reach
you, like medicine to someone who is about to die. It is true that the king of Sindhu has many satisfied subjects.
But they are weak and foolish and are waiting for a calamity to strike them. When they see you collect aides one
by one and behold your manliness, they will lose heart and his enemies will join you. Conduct alliances with them
and roam around in mountainous forts, waiting for the time when he will be destroyed. He is not beyond old age.
Nor is he immortal. You are Sanjaya only in name. I do not see it in you[Sanjaya is someone who brings about victory (jaya).]. O son! Live up to your name. Do not
make your name false. When you were only a child, an immensely wise brahmana who had foresight said, "After
confronting great hardships, he will prosper again." Remembering those words, I hope that you will be victorious.
O son! Therefore, I am repeatedly telling you about this. If others thrive on the perseverance with which a person
pursues his goals, and if he pursues these goals with reflection, that person will certainly be successful. Your ancestors also confronted prosperity and adversity. O Sanjaya! Knowing this-fight. Do not turn back. Shambara[One cannot identify which Shambara this is.]
has said that there is nothing more miserable than not seeing where today's and tomorrow's meal will come from.
He said that this is a greater misery than the death of one's husband and sons. Poverty is nothing but progressive
death. I have been born in a great lineage. I have gone from one pond to another[Figuratively, from the father's household to the husband's household.]. I have been the mistress of
everything fortunate. I have been extremely honoured by my husband. Earlier, masses of well-wishers saw me bedecked in expensive garlands and ornaments, adorned in excellent garments. I am in penury now. O Sanjaya!
When you see me and your wife extremely weak, what purpose can life have for you? The slaves and servants who
used to work for us, the preceptors and the foremost priests have left us, because they no longer have sustenance.
On seeing this, what purpose can life have for you? If I do not see you today, performing the illustrious and praiseworthy deeds that you used to earlier, how can there be peace in my heart? My heart is shattered when I have to
say no to brahmanas. Neither my husband nor I, have ever said no to a brahmana. Others seek refuge with us. But
we do not seek refuge with others. If I now have to depend on others for a living, I will give up my life.

'"'When there are no shores, provide us a shore. When there are no boats, be our boat. When there is no status,
find us status. Revive those of us who are dead. If you do not cling to life, you are capable of withstanding all your
enemies. But if you follow this conduct of an eunuch, depressed in mind and troubled in soul, then free yourself of
this wretched life. A brave one becomes famous by killing a single enemy. Indra became the great Indra by slaying
Vritra alone. He obtained the great Indra's cup for drinking soma and the lordship of the worlds. He proclaimed his
name in battle and challenged the armoured enemies. When he drives away the best of armies and kills the best of
warriors in an excellent battle, a brave one obtains great fame. His enemies tremble and bow down before him.
Men who are cowards are helpless. If a skilled warrior is prepared to give up his life in battle, they satisfy every
desire that he has for riches. Even if there is terrible danger to the kingdom, even if there is doubt about remaining
alive, virtuous ones do not leave any remnants of an enemy who is near. The kingdom is a road to heaven, it is like
amrita itself. It allows for only one[The gate only allows one person to pass.] and it is closed to you. Knowing this, descend like a firebrand on the enemy.
O king! Defeat your enemies in battle. Follow your own dharma. O fortunate one! Let the enemies not see you in
this extremely dejected state, surrounded by our miserable people and delighted foes. Let me not be miserable at
seeing you in this miserable state. Pleasure with the maidens of Souvira[Vidula's son was the king of Souvira, while Sindhu was the enemy.]. Boast about your prosperity, as you
used to do earlier. Do not be so exhausted and come under the control of the maidens of Sindhu. You are young
and handsome, possess learning and have been born in a good lineage. You are renowned and famous in the world.
One like you should not act in this way, like a bull that cannot bear the burden. I think that this is worse than death.
If I see you speaking pleasant words to the enemy, or following behind him, how can there be peace in my heart?
No one born in this lineage has ever followed others. O son! You should not live in this way, sustaining yourself on
another. I know the eternal heart of kshatriyas, as described by our ancestors and those who came after them, and
also by the ancestors of the enemy and those who came after them. A kshatriya who has been born in this world
and knows about the dharma of kshatriyas, will never bow down before another, either out of fear or to earn a living. Stand upright in manliness. Do not make efforts to bend. It is better to break at the joints than to bend down. O
Sanjaya! You should be strong in your mind and roam around like a rutting elephant, bowing down before brahmanas and dharma. Control the other varnas and chastise all those who perform evil acts. Whether you possess allies or do not possess allies, you should always live in this way.'"'
