Janamejaya said, 'Kings are addicted to sacrifices and maharshis are addicted to austerities. O lord! Brahmanas
base themselves on tranquility, peacefulness and self-control. Therefore, there is nothing in this world that is
equal to the fruits of sacrifices. This is my intelligence and there is no doubt about this. O supreme among brahmanas! Many kings have performed sacrifices. They have obtained fame in this world and, after death, have gone
to heaven. The king of the gods, the one with one thousand eyes, performed sacrifices and gave away a lot of dakshina. The immensely energetic lord obtained the entire kingdom of heaven. In that way, King Yudhishthira, with
Bhima and Arjuna at the forefront, used their valour to obtain a prosperity that was equal to that of the king of the
gods. Therefore, why did the mongoose censure the sacrifice, the great horse sacrifice that the great-souled king
performed?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O bull among men! I will tell you about the fruits of sacrifices, but I will first tell you
about the rites. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will tell you. Listen. All the maharshis have said
that, on an earlier occasion, Shakra performed a sacrifice. The officiating priests anxiously performed all the acts
associated with the rituals of a sacrifice. The hotri, possessing all the qualities, poured oblations into the fire. The
supreme rishis were there and the gods were summoned. O king! The brahmanas were extremely learned and recited agreeable chants. The bulls among the udhvaryus were not exhausted and chanted softly. O great king! It then
became the time to sacrifice the animals and the maharshis were overcome with compassion. The rishis, rich in
austerities, were distressed on seeing the animals. They approached Shakra and said, "This kind of ritual in a sacrifice is not auspicious. You desire great dharma, but this displays ignorance. O Purandara! It is not seen that the rituals of a sacrifice involve the slaughter of a large number of animals. O lord! What you have set out to do involves
a destruction of dharma. This is not dharma. This is not an act of dharma. Violence is not said to be dharma. If you
so desire, let the sacrifice be performed in accordance with the sacred texts. If one follows the ordinances indicated
for a sacrifice, great dharma will be ensured. O one with the one thousand eyes! Perform the sacrifice with seeds
that have been stored for three years. O Shakra! This will be great dharma. Think about this and understand." The
rishis knew about the truth and spoke these words. However, overcome by pride and delusion, Shatakratu did not
accept them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A great dispute arose between Shakra and the maharshis, about
whether sacrifices should be performed with animate or inanimate objects.

'The rishis knew about the truth and were distressed at this dispute. They had an agreement with Shakra that
they would go and ask King Vasu. "O fortunate one! O king! What have the sacred texts said about sacrifices?
Should a sacrifice be performed with slaughter of animals or with herbs and juices?" On hearing these words, he
reflected about the strengths and weaknesses of both sides. The king replied, "A sacrifice can be performed with
whatever is available." Having said this, the king entered the nether regions. O king! The lord who was the king of
the Chedis suffered this hardship because of having uttered a falsehood. A learned person who desires dharma
should  not  perform  a  sacrifice  with  an  object  that  has  been  obtained  unlawfully.  The  fruits  of  dharma  are  not
reaped from this. Donations may be made to brahmanas by a man who is evil-souled. This is deceitful dharma and
leads to people distrusting him. A brahmana may resort to wicked deeds and obtain riches. He may be overcome
by uncontrolled attachment and confusion. However, eventually, he attains a vile end. A wicked person may be devoid of intelligence and may give away a lot of donations. But he doesn't realize the essence and is destroyed.
There may be an evil-souled person who is attached to adharma and is violent. That evil-minded person does not
obtain any fame through his gifts, in this world or in the next. Having become overcome by greed and delusion,
one's intelligence may turn to accumulation. Because of evil intelligence, such a person may oppress beings and
indulge in violence. Riches obtained through greed may be given away in sacrifices. However, it is extremely difficult for those deeds to lead to any success. There are those who are rich in austerities. They give away what has
been obtained through unchha-roots, fruits, herbs, water and leaves. These men follow dharma. Having given
away these gifts, they go to heaven. There is great dharma in renunciation, donations, compassion towards beings,
brahmacharya, truthfulness, lack of anger, fortitude and forgiveness. This is eternal dharma and this is the eternal
foundation. We have heard of brahmanas and kings like Vishvamitra in earlier times. Vishvamitra, Asita, King
Janaka, Kakshasena, Arshtishena, King Sindhudvipa-these and many others obtained supreme success. The kings
and those rich in austerities resorted to truth and gave away what was lawfully obtained. O  descendant of  the
Bharata lineage! Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras who resort to austerities and purify themselves in
the fire of dharma and donations, go to heaven.'
