Yajnavalkya said, 'O best among men! I will tell you about the measurement of time for the unmanifest. Ten
thousand kalpas make up a single day for him. O lord of men! His night is said to be of the same duration.
When night is over, he awakes and first creates the herbs, which provide sustenance to all living beings. He then
creates Brahma, who arises from the golden egg. It has been heard by us that his form is there in all[Brahma.] living beings. Having dwelt for one year inside the egg, the great sage Prajapati emerged and created the entire earth, heaven above it, and all that is below. O king! Those who have studied the Vedas know that the sky is between earth
and heaven. The lord created the sky to lie between them. Those who are learned about the Vedas and the Vedangas say that the duration of his day is seven thousand and five hundred kalpas. Those who have thought about adhyatma say that his night is of an equal duration. From his divine self, he creates Mahat and consciousness. Before
creating any other beings, the great rishi created four sons[Through his mental powers, Brahma created four sons-Sanaka, Sanatana, Sananda and Sanatkumara. However,
this is also interpreted as mind, intelligence, consciousness and superconsciousness.]. O supreme among kings! We have heard that these
were the ancestors of the fathers. O best among men! We have heard that the gods, the ancestors, all those who surround the world of the gods and mobile and immobile objects were their sons. Parameshthi, the consciousness,
then created the five elements-the earth, the wind, the sky, the water and the light, as the fifth. This consciousness, which led to the third creation, is said to have five thousand kalpas as his night and his day is said to possess
an equal duration. O lord of the earth! Sound, touch, form, taste and scent, as the fifth, are known as Vishesha and
adhere to the five great elements. Because they are enveloped by these, beings kill each other. They respect each
other, but also rival each other. Overcome by those undecaying qualities, they slaughter each other. They whirl
around in this world and are born as inferior species. O lord of men! Their[Of the great elements.] day is said to last for three thousand
kalpas. Their night is of the same duration and this is also the case with the mind. O Indra among kings! Instigated
by the senses, the mind circulates among all of them. The senses do not see anything. It is the mind that sees. The
eye perceives form only when it is driven by the mind. The eye doesn't do this alone. When the mind is distracted,
the eye may seem to see, but does not actually see. It is said that all the senses perceive. O king! But this is incorrect. When the mind does not act, the senses do not act either. The mind does not cease to act because the senses
cease to act. The mind is the foremost and influences the senses. The mind is said to be the lord of all the senses. O
immensely illustrious one! These penetrate all creatures.'"'
