Vaishampayana said, 'When King Duryodhana heard Karna's words, he was extremely delighted. But he again became sad and spoke these words. "O Karna! What you have told me has always been in my mind. But I will not
obtain permission to go to where the Pandavas are. Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, always mourns for those brave
ones. Because of the power of their austerities, he considers the Pandavas to be superior. If the king gets to know
about our desires, he will seek to protect the future and not grant us permission. O immensely radiant one! There
can be no reason to go to Dvaitavana than to exterminate the enemies who are in the forest. At the time of gambling with the dice, you know the words Kshatta[Vidura.] addressed to me, you and Soubala. Thinking of all those words
and the other lamentations, I cannot make up mind as to whether one should go or not go. I will obtain great pleasure if I see Bhima and Phalguna[Arjuna.], together with Krishna, miserable in the forest. The pleasure that I will get
from winning the earth is less than that from seeing the sons of Pandu, clad in bark and skins. O Karna! What joy
can be greater than the sight of Drupada's daughter Droupadi, clad in red[Kashaya, red or ochre, is the colour of an ascetic's robes.] garments in the forest? If Dharmaraja,
Bhimasena and Pandava[That is, Arjuna.] see me united with this supreme prosperity, it is worth living. But I do not see a means
whereby we can go to the forest, or a means whereby the king will give us permission to go. Therefore, together
with Soubala and Duhshasana, find out a skilful means whereby we can go to the forest. After I have thought about
whether one should go or not go, I will approach the king tomorrow. When I am seated with Bhishma, supreme
among the Kurus, together with Soubala, you must propose the reason that you have thought of. Having heard the
words of Bhishma and the king about going, I will then entreat the grandfather[Bhishma.] and decide on the course of action." All of them agreed to this and returned to their houses.

'When night was over, Karna came to the king. Karna smilingly told Duryodhana, "O lord of men! A means has
been found. Listen. O lord of men! All the ghoshas[Stations where the cowherds assemble cattle.] are in Dvaitavana, awaiting you. There is no doubt that we
can undertake an expedition to the ghoshas. O lord of the earth! It is always proper to go on a ghosha expedition. O
king! If you tell your father this, he will grant you permission." While they were conversing in this fashion, having
decided on the ghosha expedition, Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, smilingly replied. "I can see that this means of
going is without any difficulties. The king will not only give us permission, he will press us to go. O lord of men!
All the ghoshas in Dvaitavana are waiting for you. There is no doubt that we can go there on a ghosha expedition."

All of them then laughed and offered each other their palms[The palms of their hands. A more contemporary rendering would be that they shook hands.]. Having decided on this, they went to see the foremost among the Kurus.'
