Yudhishthira asked, "On this earth, who is the man who is loved by all the worlds, is unblemished and possesses
all the spirits and also has every kind of quality?"

'Bhishma replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! You have asked me a question. In this connection, there
was a conversation between Ugrasena and Keshava about Narada[Ugrasena was the king of Mathura and belonged to the Kukkura clan. He was deprived of the kingdom by his
son, Kamsa, and imprisoned. After Kamsa was killed by Krishna, Ugrasena became the king again. Krishna's
father was married to Kamsa's sister, Devaki.].

'"Ugrasena said, 'Behold. All the worlds have resolved to praise Narada. I think that he possesses all the qualities. I am asking you. Tell me.'

'"Vasudeva replied, 'O lord of the Kukkuras! Listen to me and I will tell you what you have asked me. O lord of
men! I will briefly tell you about Narada's virtuous qualities. His character and conduct are such that he does not
suffer from arrogance, destructive of the body. There is no gap in his learning and his character. That is the reason
he is worshipped everywhere. The ascetic Narada is restrained in his speech and there is no exception to this.
There is no desire and avarice in him. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. He knows the truth about
adhyatma. He is tranquil, capable and in control of his senses. He is upright and truthful. That is the reason he is
worshipped everywhere. He is energetic and illustrious. He possesses intelligence, policy and humility. Because of
his birth, austerities and age, he is worshipped everywhere. He is cheerful in his conduct. He is excellent in his
pleasures and food. He is considerate and pure. He speaks excellent words, devoid of malice. That is the reason he
is worshipped everywhere. He firmly acts so as to ensure welfare. There is no sin in him. He is not pleased at the
hardships of others. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. He desires to hear the objectives of the Vedas,
the sacred texts and the accounts, and tolerates those who are ignorant. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. He behaves equally. There is no one he loves and no one he hates. He speaks what is pleasant to the mind.
That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. He is extremely learned and is colourful in his tales. He possesses
knowledge. He is without laziness and without deceit. He is not distressed. He is without anger and without greed.
That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. He has never engaged in any quarrels for the sake of artha, dharma or kama. He has severed all taints. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. He is firm in his devotion.
His soul has no blemish. He is learned and is devoid of cruelty. He is free from all sins of delusion. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. Though he is seen to be attached, he is actually detached from all the things that
cause attachment. His doubts do not last for a long time. He is eloquent. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. For the sake of accomplishing any object or obtaining respect, he never praises himself. He is not envious
and is mild in his speech. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. There are many kinds of ordinary conduct in this world. He is accomplished and knows about these. He associates with these people, but does not censure them. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. He does not hate any kind of knowledge and subsists
on austerities. He does not allow himself to spend time fruitlessly. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere.
He has conquered exhaustion. He is accomplished in his wisdom. He is not content with meditation. He resorts to
the rituals, without any distraction. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere. Because his policies are good,
he is never shamed. He is engaged in the supreme objective. He does not reveal the secrets of others. That is the
reason he is worshipped everywhere. He is not delighted at obtaining wealth. Nor is he distressed when nothing is
obtained. He is firm in his intelligence and his soul is not attached. That is the reason he is worshipped everywhere.
He is vested with all the qualities. He is skilful and ceaseless in the pursuit of the auspicious. He knows about time.
He knows about policy. He knows about the people to whom good things should not be done.'"'
