'Markandeya said, "The immensely valorous king of the vultures, Jatayu, was the son of Aruna and the brother of
Sampati and was a friend of Dasharatha's. When the bird saw his[Dasharatha's.] daughter-in-law in Ravana's arms, he angrily
rushed at the lord of the rakshasas. The vulture told him, 'O traveller in the night! Let her go. Let Maithili go. How
can you carry her off as long as I am alive? If you do not give up the daughter-in-law, you will not escape with
your life.' Saying this, he powerfully attacked the Indra among rakshasas with his talons. He struck him with his
wings and beak and lacerated him in many ways and large quantities of blood began to gush out[From Ravana's body.], like a mountain
spring. Thus struck by the vulture, who wished to do that which would bring Rama pleasure, he grasped his sword
and sliced off the wings of the bird. Having killed the king of the vultures, and looking like a mountain through
scattered clouds, the rakshasa grasped Sita in his arms and rose up into the sky. Whenever Vaidehi saw a circle of
hermitages, a pond, a river or a well, she loosened and flung down her ornaments. On the slopes of a mountain, she
saw five bulls among monkeys. The intelligent one flung down an expensive and celestial garment there. Driven by
the wind, the beautiful yellow garment fell down in the midst of those Indras among monkeys, like lightning in a
cloud.

'"While Vaidehi was thus being carried away, the wise Rama had killed the great deer. While he was returning,
he saw his brother Lakshmana. On seeing his brother, he rebuked him. 'How could you leave Vaidehi in a forest
infested with rakshasas?' He thought about his being drawn away by a rakshasa in the form of a deer and of his
brother's arrival and was tormented by thoughts. Having rebuked him, Rama swiftly approached and said, 'O Lakshmana! Is Vaidehi still alive? I might not see her again.' Lakshmana then reported everything that Sita had told
him, including the words that Vaidehi had spoken later. With a burning heart, Rama went towards the hermitage
and saw the fallen vulture, like a mountain. Fearing him to be a rakshasa, Kakutstha drew his powerful bow and
rushed towards him, together with Lakshmana. The energetic one then spoke to Rama and Lakshmana. 'I am the
king of the vultures. O fortunate ones! I am a friend of Dasharatha's.' On hearing these words, they put aside their
bright bows and asked, 'Who is this who is mentioning our father by name?' Then they saw that the wings of the
bird had been sliced off. The vulture told them how Ravana had killed him, for Sita's sake. Raghava then asked the
vulture for the direction in which Ravana had gone. Indicating this with a nod of his head, the vulture passed away.
Kakutstha understood the sign of the gesture to mean the south. He performed the last rites in honour of his father's friend. They saw the hermitage, with its cushions and vessels scattered and its pots broken. The place was
deserted and infested with an army of jackals. Overcome with unhappiness and grief at Vaidehi's abduction, the
scorchers of enemies headed south, towards Dandakaranya. In that great forest, Rama, together with Soumitri[Sumitra's son, Lakshmana.],
saw many herds of deer running in different directions. They heard the terrible cries of many creatures, increasingly roaring like a forest fire.

'"In a short while, they saw Kabandha[Kabandha means a headless trunk and Kabandha is the name of a rakshasa.], terrible in form. He was like a cloud or a mountain. His shoulders
were as extensive as a shala tree. He had large arms. His large eye was located on his chest. He had a giant mouth
on a giant belly. With great ease, the rakshasa grasped Lakshmana in his arms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Soumitri was instantly overcome by despair. Then, glancing towards Rama, he dragged him[Lakshmana.] towards his
mouth, and afflicted with despair, he[Lakshmana.] told Rama, 'Look at my state. Vaidehi has been abducted. I am in this dire
state. You have been dislodged from your kingdom. Our father is dead. Together with Vaidehi, I will not witness
your return to Kosala and your instatement in the earthly kingdom of our fathers and grandfathers. Fortunate are
those who will see you consecrated with kusha grass, parched rice and shami[The name of a tree.] wood, with a face like the moon
amidst scattered clouds.' In this way, the wise Lakshmana lamented in various ways. Undaunted in the midst of
this calamity, Kakutstha told him, 'O tiger among men! Do not be immersed in sorrow in this fashion. While I am
here, there is nothing he can do. Slice off his right arm, and I will sever the left.' While he was speaking, Rama cut
off his left arm with his extremely sharp sword, as if it was branch of sesamum. On seeing his brother Raghava
standing there, the powerful Soumitri hacked the right arm with his sword. Lakshmana repeatedly smote the rakshasa on his side and losing his life, the gigantic Kabandha fell down on the ground. Then a divine-looking being
was seen to emerge from his body. He was stationed in the sky, like the resplendent sun in the sky. The eloquent
Rama asked him, 'Who are you? I am asking you. Tell me. How did this happen? It seems to me to be extraordinary.' He replied, 'O king! I am the gandharva Vishvavasu. Because of Brahma's curse, I had to be born in
the womb of a rakshasa. Sita has been abducted by King Ravana, who resides in Lanka. Go to Sugriva and he will
help you. Lake Pampa is near Mount Rishyamukha. It has pure water and teems with swans and ducks. Sugriva
lives there with four advisers. He is the brother of Vali, the king of the monkeys who wears a golden garland. I can
tell you this much. You will see Janaki again. It is certain that the king of the monkeys knows about Ravana's
abode.' Having said this, to the amazement of the brave Rama and Lakshmana, the extremely radiant celestial being disappeared."'
