'Duhshanta said, "O princess! O fortunate one! You have spoken well. O one with the beautiful hips! Be my wife.
Tell me what I can do for you. O beautiful one! Today, I will present you with golden necklaces, garments, golden
earrings, sparkling gems and jewels from many countries, golden coins and skins. Let my entire kingdom be yours
today. O beautiful one! Be my wife. O lovely one! O timid one! O one with the beautiful thighs! Marry me according to gandharva[One of the eight forms of marriage. In this form, there are no ceremonies and no relatives are present. The
bride and the groom willingly marry each other in what is a marriage of love.] rites, because it is said that a gandharva marriage is the best."

'Shakuntala replied, "O king! My father has left the hermitage to collect fruits for food. Please wait for a while.
He will return and give me to you."

'Duhshanta said, "O unblemished one! O one with the beautiful hips! I wish that you accept me yourself. Know
that I am standing here because of you. Know that my heart is completely in you. One is one's own best friend.
One can certainly resort to one's own self. Therefore, in accordance with what is dharma, you can give your own
self to others. Eight kinds of marriage are known to have the sanction of dharma-brahma, daiva, arsha, prajapatya, asura, gandharva, rakshasa and paishacha. Manu, descended from the one who is self-created[Brahma.], has respectively described which of these is in accordance with dharma. O unblemished one! Know that according to
dharma, the first four are sanctioned for Brahmanas and the first six for Kshatriyas. For kings, even the rakshasa
form is permissible. The asura form is sanctioned for Vaishyas and Shudras. Of the five[It is not clear what this number five refers to, probably the last five of the eight mentioned forms.], three are in accordance with dharma and two are not sanctioned. The paishacha and asura forms should never be used. These are the
principles laid down by dharma and one should follow them. The gandharva and rakshasa forms are sanctioned for
Kshatriyas. Therefore, you need not be scared. There is no doubt that either one, or a mix of the two, is appropriate
for us. O beautiful one! I am full of desire for you and so are you. You should become my wife according to the
gandharva form of marriage."

'Shakuntala said, "O best of the Puru race! O lord! If this is the path indicated by dharma and I am really my
own mistress, know my terms before I give myself. Give me your word to this secret agreement between us. O
king! O Duhshanta! Give me your truthful promise that the son who is born to me will succeed you. If that is accepted, you may unite with me."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Without any hesitation, the king said, "O one with a sweet smile! It shall be that way. I
will even take you to my capital. O one with the beautiful hips! It is what you deserve and I promise you truthfully." Saying this, the rajarshi accepted the hand of she whose gait was without blemish according to the proper rites
and she accepted him. He returned to his capital after reiterating his promise and repeatedly assuring her, "I will
send a fourfold army[With infantry, cavalry, elephants and chariots.] to escort you. O one with a sweet smile! I will take you to my palace with that." O
Janamejaya! Having thus promised her, the king went away. As he went away, the king began to worry about
Kashyapa's son[Kanva.]. "What will the illustrious one, with all his ascetic powers, do when he hears?" Thinking in this
way, he entered his capital.

'A little after the king had left, Kanva returned to his hermitage. But Shakuntala was too ashamed to go and
meet her father. However, the great ascetic Kanva had divine sight and knew everything. Having seen everything
with his divine sight, the illustrious one was pleased and said, "O fortunate one! What you have done secretly today, this act of union with a man without my sanction, is not against dharma. A secret gandharva marriage between
a desiring man and a desiring woman, without mantras, is said to be the best for Kshatriyas. O Shakuntala!
Duhshanta, the one you have accepted as a husband, is the best among men, great-souled and devoted to dharma.
You will give birth to a son who will be known in this world as great-souled and immensely mighty. He will extend his sway over this entire earth that is bounded by the oceans. When that great-souled king of kings marches
out against his enemies, he will always be irresistible."

'Shakuntala then came to the tired sage and washed his feet. She took down his heavy load and properly laid out
the fruits. She said, "I have chosen King Duhshanta, best among men, as my husband. Please give me and his advisers your blessings." Kanva replied, "O beautiful one! I am prepared to bless him for your sake. O fortunate one!
Ask for a boon that you wish." Wishing to bring welfare to Duhshanta, Shakuntala then asked for the boon that
kings of the Puru lineage should always be virtuous and would never be dislodged from their kingdoms.'
