'Yudhishthira said, "O unblemished one! O one who knows about dharma! It is my view that you know everything. O father! I desire that you should tell me about the recommendations on good conduct."

'Bhishma replied, "Those with bad conduct, bad efforts and bad wisdom, characterized by rashness, are known
as the wicked. The virtuous have signs of good conduct. Auspicious men are those who do not pass urine and excrement along royal roads, amidst cattle and in the midst of fields of paddy. After doing this[Relieving oneself.], it is said to be
dharma for men to purify oneself by performing ablutions along the banks of a river and offering water to the gods.
The sun must always be worshipped. One must not sleep after the sun has arisen. In the morning and the evening,
one must perform the sandhya meditation by facing the east and subsequently, the west[The east in the morning and the west in the evening.]. After having washed
the five limbs[The mouth, the two hands and the two feet.], one must eat silently, facing the east. One must not censure the food one is eating, regardless of
whether the food is tasty, or is not tasty. One must wash the hands and then arise. In the night, one must not go to
sleep with wet feet. Devarshi Narada has said that these are signs of good conduct. With a desire to purify one's
mind and limbs, every day, one must circumambulate a bull, a god, a cow pen, a place where four roads meet and a
brahmana who follows dharma. In matters of food, a man who generally does not differentiate between all the
guests, attendants, relatives and servants is praised. The gods have ordained that men must eat twice, in the morning and in the evening. In between, it has not been said that one should eat. One should fast instead. At the right
time, oblations must be offered. When it is her season, a wise person will go to his wife. He will behave like a
brahmachari towards the wives of others. Leftover food from a brahmana is like amrita. It is like milk from a
mother's breast. These are truly worshipped by people. The virtuous truly worship them. If a person has abstained
from meat[Because of a vow.], he must refrain from eating meat, even if it has been sanctified by reciting from the Yajur Veda. One
must not eat useless flesh[Useless flesh is defined as meat that has not been obtained from sacrifices to the gods and the ancestors.]. One must also avoid meat from the back. Whether one is in one's own country, or
whether one is in some other country, a guest must never be made to fast. Having obtained the desired fruits of action, one must offer them to the seniors. It is a duty to offer one's seat to seniors and respectfully greet them. By
worshipping one's seniors, one is united with long life, fame and prosperity. One must not look towards the rising
sun. When she is naked, nor should one look towards another man's wife. Sexual intercourse that is in conformity
with dharma must be practised, but in secret. The heart is a tirtha among all tirthas. The heart is the purest of the
pure. All acts done by a noble person are pure, including the touching of hair. Every time one meets another person, one must ask him questions about his welfare. It has been instructed that, in the morning and in the evening,
brahmanas must be worshipped. The right hand must be used in an assembly of gods, amidst cows, in performing
rites among brahmanas, in studying and in eating. Through this, the stores of a merchant and the crops of an agriculturist increase manifold. Grain, beasts of burden and cattle also multiply. When one has finished eating, one
must perform tarpana with the hand[The offering of water to deceased ancestors, with water thrown from the
right hand.]. One must always say that the payasa and krisara have been cooked
well[Payasa is rice cooked in milk and sugar. Krisara is made out of wheat
flour, rice and sesamum. The dessert must be particularly praised.]. After shaving, spitting, bathing, eating and recovering from a disease, one must greet everyone with, 'May
you have a long life.' While facing the sun, one must not pass urine. One must not look at one's own excrement.
One must not sleep with a woman who is a suta. One must also avoid eating with her. One must avoid addressing
elders by name or by using 'tvam[Tvam is used for juniors and equals. Seniors must be addressed as bhavan for males and bhavati for females.]'. There is no sin in addressing either juniors or equals in this way. If there is
wickedness in the heart, this shows up in deeds. If wicked people conceal their wrong deeds, performed knowingly, from good people, they are nevertheless destroyed. Wicked deeds performed knowingly may be hidden from
extremely learned people. Men may not see them. But they are seen by the residents of heaven. A sin committed
by a wicked person leads to a further sin. An act of dharma performed by someone who observes dharma follows
the doer. A foolish person does not remember the sins that he has committed. However, they circle around the
doer. Just as Rahu approaches the moon, those wicked deeds approach that ignorant person. Objects stored with
the hope of something are not enjoyed at the right time. The learned do not praise this, because death does not wait
for anyone. The learned have said that for all beings, dharma exists in the mind. Therefore, all beings must observe
purity in their minds. Dharma must be practised singly. There is no aide in dharma. One should only resort to the
ordinances. What will an aide do? Men are born from the gods. The gods have amrita in heaven. If one observes
dharma, after death, one enjoys extreme happiness."'
