'"Bharadvaja asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! How does one become a brahmana?
What about a kshatriya? O brahmana rishi! O supreme among eloquent ones! Tell me
about vaishyas and shudras.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'A brahmana is said to be someone who has been cleansed and purified
by jatakarma and other samskaras[There are thirteen samskaras or sacraments. The list varies a bit. But one
list is vivaha (marriage), garbhalambhana (conception), pumshavana (engendering a male child), simantonnayana (parting the hair, performed in
the fourth month of pregnancy), jatakarma (birth rites), namakarana
(naming), chudakarma (tonsure), annaprashana (first solid food), keshanta (first shaving of the head), upanayana (sacred thread), vidyarambha
(commencement of studies), samavartana (graduation) and antyeshti (funeral rites).], is devoted to studying the Vedas, is engaged in the six
tasks[Teaching, studying, donating, receiving gifts, performing sacrifices and
officiating at the sacrifices of others.], is always devoted to the vows and is devoted to the truth. Truthfulness, donations,
self-control, non-violence, lack of injury, forgiveness, withdrawal from improper acts, austerities-where these are seen, that person is said to be a brahmana. A person devoted to
the tasks of kshatriyas[Fighting.], devoted to studying the Vedas, one who donates and seizes[From wrongdoers and for the purpose of donations.]-
such a person is said to be a kshatriya. A person engaged in animal husbandry, agriculture
and trade, always immersed in purity and devoted to the study of the Vedas-such a person
has the signs of a vaishya. If a person is always addicted to devouring every kind of food,
performs all tasks and is impure, if he abandons the conduct prescribed in the Vedas-such
a person is said to be a shudra. If the signs are not seen in a shudra, then that shudra is not a
shudra. If they are not seen in a brahmana, then that brahmana is not a brahmana. One must
use every means to control avarice and anger. Know that these are impure and that the atman must be controlled. For welfare, one must always restrain anger, lack of austerities
and jealousy. Knowledge and honour must be protected from disrespect. The atman must
not be distracted. A person who undertakes everything without any hope and without any
bonds, a person who renounces everything as an oblation, such an intelligent person is
known as a true renouncer. One must be non-violent towards all beings and act as if everyone is a friend. There is no need to disclose it. One should uphold one's atman in secrecy.
One must forsake all gifts. An intelligent person must control his senses. One should base
oneself of lack of sorrow and freedom from fear, both here and there[In this world and in the next.]. The sages are always in control of their souls, self-restrained and always engaged in the observance of austerities. One must conquer desire, which is difficult to vanquish. Even in the midst of attachments, one must cultivate sentiments of not being attached. Everything that can be
grasped by the senses has an existence that is manifest. But one must attentively seek to
know what is not manifest and grasp the linga[This is a reference to the linga-sharira, the subtle body. When the physical body is destroyed, the linga-sharira remains. When the linga-sharira is
destroyed, one merges with the brahman.]. One must grasp prana in the mind and uphold the brahman in prana. If one can free oneself from attachments, there is no need to
think of any other kind of attachment. In this way, a brahmana can obtain bliss in the brahman. Constant purity, devotion to good conduct and compassion towards all beings-these
are the signs of a brahmana.'"'
