Bhishma said, "Thus addressed, Matanga was overwhelmed by great grief. He went to Gaya and stood on one
toe for one hundred years. He performed many kinds of extremely difficult yoga. He became thin and was reduced to veins. The one with dharma in his soul was reduced to nothing but bones and we have heard that he fell
down. When he was falling down, Vasava came and seized him. After all, the lord and the granter of boons is engaged in the welfare of all beings.

'"Shakra said, 'O Matanga! You are engaged in trying to obtain the status of a brahmana, but this is a perverse
pursuit. Worship what will bring you happiness. Do not worship what will bring you unhappiness. Among all creatures, it is controlled brahmanas who display yoga and kshema. The ancestors and the gods are satisfied through
brahmanas. O Matanga! Among all creatures, brahmanas are said to be supreme. It is brahmanas who grant what
you are asking for[The implication has to be deduced. Had Matanga been a brahmana, thanks to his powers, he need not have
asked for a boon from anyone else. If Matanga needed to ask someone else for a boon, he couldn't be a
brahmana.]. O son! One is repeatedly and progressively cooked in the fire of the cycle of life. It is only in
rare cases that one can obtain the status of a brahmana.'

'"Matanga replied, 'I am already afflicted by grief. Why are you oppressing me? You are striking me, but I am
already like one who is dead. I am not grieving that I have not obtained the radiance that comes about from being a
brahmana. O Shatakratu! Among the three varnas, if the status of a brahmana is so difficult to obtain, why do men
who have obtained it deviate? An evil person who acts in this way should be regarded as the worst among wicked
ones, since he disregards the status of being a brahmana, something that is like getting riches which are extremely
difficult to obtain. It is indeed hard to become a brahmana and having become one, it is very difficult to maintain
it. Having obtained something that is difficult to get, men do not maintain it. O Shakra! I find pleasure in only one
thing[His soul.]. I do not suffer from opposite sentiments. I am devoid of possessions. I am non-violent. I  am self-restrained and generous. Why should I not obtain the status of a brahmana? Let me roam around in my own pleasures, just as birds roam around as they will. Without any constraints, let me be revered by both brahmanas and
kshatriyas. O Purandara! Let me obtain fame without decay.'

'"Indra said, 'You will become famous as the god of metre and will be worshipped by women[A sage named Matanga was the author of a work (Brihaddeshi) on music.].'"
'Bhishma continued, "Vasava granted this boon to him and disappeared. Having given up his life, Matanga obtained a supreme station. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus, the status of a brahmana is supreme. As indicated in the words of the great Indra, it is extremely difficult to obtain."'
