'Bhima said, "I will never go without seeing your earlier form. If you are pleased with me, show me your own
form."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words of Bhima, the ape smiled and showed him the form that he had adopted
when he leapt over the ocean. In order to please his brother, he adopted that gigantic shape. His body grew in
length and breadth. The immensely radiant monkey stood as large as a mountain, covering the plantain grove.
Having attained that gigantic shape that was like a second mountain, with copper-coloured eyes, sharp teeth and
eyes marked by frowns, the monkey lashed his long tail and enveloped the directions. Bhima, the descendant of the
Kourava lineage, saw his brother's gigantic shape and was astounded. He was repeatedly delighted. On seeing his
blazing energy, like the sun, or a golden mountain, or the sky on fire, Bhima closed his eyes.

'Hanuman then smiled and spoke to Bhimasena. "O unblemished one! You are capable of seeing my body up to
this point. I can go on extending my body, as much as I desire. O Bhima! Amidst enemies, my body becomes gigantic through its own energy." On seeing Hanuman's immensely terrible body, the equal of Mounts Vindhya and
Mandara, Pavana's son was bewildered[Pavana or Vayu is the wind-god and Bhima was his son.]. Though he was delighted, his soul trembled. Bhima joined his hands
in salutation and spoke to Hanuman, who was still established in that form. "O lord! O immensely valorous one! I
have seen your extensive body. Now decrease it through your own powers. I am unable to look at you. You are like
the rising sun. You are immeasurable. You are as inaccessible as Mount Mainaka. O brave one! It is a source of
great wonder to me today that, though Rama had you at his side, he had to fight with Ravana himself. With the
strength of your arms alone, you were capable of destroying Lanka with its armies and vehicles. O Marut's
son[Marut is another name for Pavana or Vayu and Hanuman was the wind-god's son too.]! There is nothing that is impossible for you. Ravana, with all his armies, was no match for you in battle."

'Having been thus addressed by Bhima, Hanuman, bull among monkeys, replied in a soft and deep voice. "O
mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is as you say. O Bhimasena! That evil rakshasa was no
match for me. But if I had killed that Ravana, the thorn of the worlds, Raghava's glory would have been diminished[Rama is descended from Raghu's lineage and Raghava is one of Rama's names.]. That is the reason I ignored him. By killing the rakshasa king, together with his armies, and taking Sita
back to his own city, that brave one established his fame in this world. O immensely wise brother! You are devoted
to ensuring my welfare. Protected by Vayu, depart now, along a path that is safe and secure. O best among the
Kuru lineage! This path will lead you to Sougandhika forest[We have translated Sougandhika as a proper name. Sougandhika means something that is extremely fragrant
and might be an adjective too.] and the grove of the lord of riches[The lord of riches is Kubera.], guarded by
yakshas and rakshasas. Do not perform the rash act of plucking any flowers there yourself. A man must specially
honour the gods there. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When satisfied
with sacrifices, oblations, reverence and mantras, the gods exhibit favours towards the faithful. O son[The word used is tata, applied affectionately to any inferior or junior.]! Therefore, do not act out of bravery. Observe your own dharma. Abiding by your own dharma, know and follow the
supreme dharma. Without knowing dharma and without serving the aged, even the likes of Brihaspati are incapable of comprehending dharma and artha. One should carefully discriminate among situations where that which is
not dharma goes by the name of dharma, and that which is dharma goes by the name of that which is not dharma.
Those who are deluded in intelligence cannot distinguish. Dharma results from conduct. The Vedas are established
on dharma. Sacrifices originate from the Vedas. The gods are established in sacrifices. The gods are sustained
through sacrifices and rituals prescribed in the Vedas. Even men sustain themselves through the ordinances decreed
by Brihaspati and Ushanas[Brihaspati is the preceptor of the gods and Ushanas (Shukra) is the preceptor of the demons.]-buying and selling, mining, trading, agriculture and animal husbandry. Everything
is sustained through such vocations and dharma. For the three varnas[The word used is dvija. Though sometimes applied to brahmanas, this is also used for the first three varnas
-brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas. In the given context, this broader meaning seems to be indicated.], three pursuits have been indicated in the
sacred texts-study of the three Vedas, following a vocation and governing. When these are properly followed, the
world's welfare is ensured. But if there is no pursuit of dharma and these three routes to dharma are not followed,
this earth is not controlled and there is no governance. If beings do not follow dharma and their vocations, they
will perish. By regularly following the three pursuits, beings prosper. There is one characteristic that marks the
eternal dharma of the three varnas-sacrificing, studying and giving. These are three pursuits that are common to
everyone. Performing sacrifices, studying and accepting[Accepting gifts.] constitute the dharma of brahmanas. Protection is that
of kshatriyas and providing sustenance is the dharma of vaishyas. Servitude to the other three varnas is known to
be the dharma of shudras, as it is of those who are in their preceptor's house[Students in the brahmacharya stage.] and cannot therefore beg for alms
or perform oblations and vows. O Kounteya! Your dharma is that of a kshatriya. Your dharma is protection. Be
humble. Control your senses and follow your own dharma. He who has consulted elders, the honest, the intelligent
and the learned, and then resorts to punishment by the staff, governs well. But a decadent one suffers. When a king
punishes and rewards according to what is needed, it is then that the contours of the world are properly laid out.
Therefore, spies must constantly be used to ascertain the state of the nation, the fortifications, the forces of friends
and enemies, and their conditions of prosperity and adversity. Kings possess four means that lead to success-wise
counsel, valour, punishment and reward and sagacity. Whether applied together or in isolation, sama, dana, danda
and bheda can lead to success[Sama is conciliation or pacification, dana is the giving of gifts or bribery, danda is punishment and bheda is
the creation of dissension and strife (among enemies).]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Spies and counsel are the source of policies.
Good counsel leads to success and one should consult with those who are skilled. In secret matters, one should not
consult with a woman, with a fool, with a child, with one who is greedy, with one who is mean and with one who
is touched by insanity. One should only consult with wise ones and get tasks undertaken by those who are capable.
Policies must be devised by those who are gentle. Fools must always be avoided. Those who follow dharma must
be engaged in matters related to dharma, learned ones in matters connected to artha, eunuchs in matters connected
to women and cruel ones for the performance of cruel deeds. The nature of action, what should be done and what
should not be done and the reasons behind any particular task, should be decided on the basis of the relative
strengths and weaknesses of one's enemy, as well as one's own. Using one's intelligence, favours should be shown
to righteous ones who have sought refuge. However, evil and unskilled ones must be repressed. When a king follows reward and chastisement properly, the boundaries of the world are laid out properly. O Partha! This is the difficult and terrible dharma that I have delineated for you. Follow this humbly, in accordance with what has been
prescribed as your own dharma. The brahmanas go to heaven through the dharma of austerities, control of the self
and oblations. The vaishyas obtain the desired objective through donations, serving guests and rituals. Like that,
the kshatriyas attain heaven on earth through protection and punishments. Without being addicted to desire and hatred, without avarice and controlling their anger, and chastising appropriately, they reach the worlds attained by the
virtuous."'
