'Bhishma said, "O Partha! Listen to this account of an ancient history. This is an account of an ancient conversation that took place between a vulture and a jackal in Vidisha. There were some people who were miserable. There
was a child who had not yet become a youth. He died and he was the only possession the family had. They wept
and were distracted by grief. They picked up the dead child and advanced in the direction of the cremation ground.
They sat down on the ground there. They passed the child from one lap to another and wept. On hearing the sounds
of their weeping, a vulture approached and spoke these words. 'He is just one person in this world. Abandon him
and quickly go away. Time has brought thousands of men and thousands of women to this place. Did they not have
relatives? Behold. The entire universe is full of joy and misery. In due course, there is union and separation. There
are those who pick up the dead and come here and there are those who follow them. However, once their lifespans
are over, these people also depart. You have spent sufficient time in this cremation ground, frequented by vultures
and jackals. It is full of terrible skeletons and is fearful to all beings. Someone who has followed the dharma of
time will never become alive again. Whether it is someone who is loved or whether it is someone who is hated, all
beings attain this kind of end. Everyone who is born in the world of mortals will indeed die. This is a path that has
been ordained by the Destroyer. How can someone who is dead become alive again? People have finished their
tasks[For the day. The vulture is lying.] and the sun is about to set. Return to your own residences and abandon this affection for the son.' O king!
On hearing the words of the vulture, they lamented. Abandoning their son on the ground, the relatives departed.
They determined that they should abandon their son. They had no hope of his becoming alive. They arose and took
to the road.

'"At this time, a jackal emerged from its hole. Its complexion was like that of a crow or a cloud. As they advanced, it told them, 'It is evident that humans have no compassion. O stupid people! The sun is still there. Do not
be frightened and show some affection. This moment has many forms and perhaps he may come back to life. You
have abandoned all affection for your son and have flung him away on the ground. Without any compassion, how
can you forsake your son on the cremation ground and go away? This child was sweet in speech and you have no
affection for your son. He spoke to please you and you are about to go away. You do not see the affection animals
and birds have towards their sons. This is despite their obtaining no fruits from this nurturing[Unlike humans, birds and animals are not sustained by their offspring in their old age.]. Quadrupeds,
birds and insects are beings that are only driven by affection. They will obtain their places in the world hereafter,
like sages who perform sacrifices. They take delight in their sons, though this brings nothing in this world, or in the
next. We do not see any qualities these beings obtain from this act of nurturing. Yet, when they do not see their
beloved sons, they are full of sorrow. After growing up, the mother and the father are never sustained. Do humans
have affection? So how can there be grief? This son was the extender of the lineage. Abandoning him, you are going away. For a long time, release your tears. For a long time, gaze on him affectionately. In particular, it must be
extremely difficult to abandon something that one loves. When one faces decay, when one has been accused and
when one advances towards a cremation ground, it is relatives who stay with that person, and not others. Everyone
loves life. Everyone obtains affection. Behold the kind of affection that can be seen in those from inferior
species[Animals and birds.]. This one has large eyes, like the petals of a lotus. How can you abandon him and go away? He has been
bathed and decorated with garlands, like one who has just been married.'"

'Bhishma said, "Hearing these piteous laments of the jackal, all those men returned, for the sake of the corpse.

'"The vulture said, 'Alas! O ones limited in intelligence! Shame on you. This jackal is cruel, inferior and limited
in spirit. Are these men returning because of what it has said? Why are you grieving over something that has given
up the five elements and is like an empty piece of wood? It is immobile. Why are you not sorrowing over your own
selves? Perform terrible austerities and cleanse yourself from sin. Everything can be obtained through austerities.
What will lamentations achieve? Know that those with bodies must suffer from ill fortune. Everyone must leave
this world, giving rise to endless sorrow. Austerities are the foundation for riches, cattle, gold, gems and jewels.
These are obtained through the yoga of austerities. Depending on what they have done[In earlier lives.], beings obtain happiness
and unhappiness. Accepting this unhappiness and happiness, beings are born. The son does not get the father's karma. The father does not get the son's karma. Tied down by their good and wicked deeds, they advance along different paths. Carefully follow dharma and retreat from what is adharma. At the right time, act appropriately towards gods and brahmanas. Give up your sorrow and misery and withdraw from affection towards your son.
Whether one has performed auspicious deeds, or whether one has perpetrated extremely terrible ones of adharma,
the results will be reaped. What role is there for relatives? When relatives leave their beloved relatives here, they
do not linger. With eyes full of tears, they abandon their affection and depart. Whether one is wise or stupid,
whether one is rich or poor, whether one is auspicious or inauspicious, everyone comes under the subjugation of
time. What will you accomplish through grief? Why are you sorrowing over the dead? Time is the lord of everyone
and following dharma, he looks on everyone equally. Everyone faces death-youth, children, the aged and even
foetuses. This is the way of the universe.'

'"The jackal said, 'You were extremely sorrowful, overcome by affection on account of your son. Alas! The vulture with limited intelligence has diluted that affection. His words were appropriate, chosen well and respectful.
That is the reason you have abandoned your affection, which is so difficult to let go, and are going towards the
pond[To have a bath of purification before leaving.]. Alas! Separation from a dead son leaves one empty. One laments in severe misery, like a cow without a
calf. I now know the sorrow that men face on this earth. On seeing the pity associated with affection, I am also
shedding tears. One must always seek to strive, though success is determined by destiny. Destiny and manliness
combine with earlier deeds. One must always be hopeful. How can there be happiness from despair? Success is obtained through endeavour. How can you leave in this cruel way? He has resulted from your own flesh. His form
has been generated from half of your body[This is specifically addressed to the dead son's father.]. He was the extender of the lineage of your fathers. After abandoning
him in the forest, where will you go? Stay here until the sun has set and evening has presented itself. Perhaps you
will stay here with your son, or take him away[Take the son away in case he revives.].'
'"The vulture said, 'O men! It is now one thousand years since I have been born. I have never seen a dead
woman or man come back to life again. Some who died in the womb are born. Some die the moment they are born.
Others died after they have attained youth and exhibit valour[In battles.]. The fortune of quadrupeds and birds is temporary.
The lifespan of mobile and immobile objects has been determined earlier. There are those who are separated from
their beloved wives and those who sorrow over their sons. Tormented by grief, they always go home. Abandoning
thousands who were not liked and hundreds who were loved, relatives are extremely miserable and depart. Abandon the one who is without energy. He is like an empty piece of wood. His life is wandering around in vapour.
Therefore, abandon him and go. This affection is futile. This concern for him is futile. He cannot see you with his
eyes. He cannot hear you with his ears. Therefore, swiftly abandon him and return to your own homes. I have used
the dharma of moksha[Ultimate liberation.]. Though they seem to be cruel, I have spoken words that are full of reason. As I have
said, quickly go away to your own respective homes. You have heard words that are full of the knowledge of wisdom. They will give you intelligence and consciousness, though they are harsh. O men! Return.'

'"The jackal said, 'He has the complexion of gold and he is adorned with ornaments. On hearing the words of
the vulture, how can you abandon your son? He has the complexion of gold and is adorned with ornaments. He is
the one who will offer funeral cakes to the ancestors. There is nothing that prevents affection, lamentation and
weeping. But if you abandon the one who has died, it is certain that you will suffer. It has been heard that Rama,
truthful in his valour, killed the shudra Shambuka, resorted to dharma, and brought a brahmana child back to
life[This is a story from Uttara Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana. A brahmana's son had died because there was adharma in the kingdom, resulting from a shudra engaging in prohibited practices. Rama killed the shudra.]. In that way, rajarshi Shveta's child met his destiny. But since he[Shveta.] always followed dharma, the very next
day, he could again bring the dead back to life. In that fashion, while you are lamenting, perhaps a siddha, a sage or
a god can perform an act of compassion.'"

'Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed, afflicted by grief and devoted to their son, they returned. Placing
his head on their laps, they wept for a long period of time."

'The vulture said, "He has been bathed with your tears. You have kneaded him with the touch of your hands.
However, ordained by Dharmaraja[Yama.], he has entered a long period of sleep. A person who has engaged in austerities is also not spared by destiny. This is the end of all affection. This is the residence of the dead. Thousands of the
young and the aged are always abandoned by their relatives on the ground, after they have spent days and nights in
misery. Refrain from grief. There has been enough of this bond. It cannot be believed that he will come back to life
again. He will not become alive again because of the words of the jackal. Someone who is dead, and has discarded
his body, does not get that body back again. Even if hundreds of jackals give up their bodies, this will not happen.
In hundreds of years, this child is incapable of becoming alive again. The child can only come back to life if
Rudra, Kumara, Brahma or Vishnu grants a boon. However, he will not become alive again because of the shedding of tears, because of any assurances, or because of a long period of lamentation. I, the jackal, you and the relatives are all of us travelling in that direction too, accepting our share of dharma and adharma. A wise person
should keep unpleasantness, harshness, hatred towards others, desire for the wives of others, adharma and falsehood a long distance away. He must carefully follow the path of truth, dharma, purity, fairness, great compassion
towards beings, lack of deceit and lack of fraudulence. While they are alive, those who do not look towards their
mothers, fathers, relatives and well-wishers-suffer destruction of dharma. He cannot see with his two eyes. His
limbs will never move. His period of being here has come to an end. What will weeping achieve?'"

'Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed, they were overcome by grief and abandoned their son on the
ground. They were tormented by affection for their son. The relatives left for home.

'"The jackal said, 'The world of mortals is terrible. All living beings are destroyed. We live for a short time and
are separated from our beloved kin. There is a lot of pretension, fraud, arguing and unpleasant speech. Considering
this, coming back here again will only increase sorrow and misery. Even for an instant, the world of humans does
not appeal to me. Alas! Shame on the men who are retreating because of the words of the vulture. You are blazing
from sorrow on account of your son. Yet, you behave like those who are ignorant. If you have any affection, how
can you discard the affection towards your son and go away? On hearing the words of the vulture, you have made
up your minds to do that which is wicked. Unhappiness comes at the end of happiness. Happiness comes at the end
of unhappiness. There is happiness and unhappiness in this world and there is nothing that does not come to an
end. You have laid this handsome child down on the surface of the ground. He has caused grief to your lineage. O
stupid ones! After abandoning your son, where will you go? There is no doubt that I can see him alive in my mind,
full of beauty and youth, blazing in his prosperity. His destruction was not deserved. O men! You will obtain happiness again. The fire that is tormenting you because of the sorrow over your son's death will be pacified. Once
you have suffered from sorrow, you will be able to ensure your own happiness. How can you ensure that if you
abandon him in this foolish way and go away now?'"

'Bhishma said, "They thus faced a conflict over dharma and paid heed to these pleasant, but false, words. The
resident of the cremation ground waited for the night and for his food[The jackal is the resident of the cremation ground. The sense is that the jackal used these false words to persuade them to stay till it was night, hoping to feed on the carcass. Had the people left before it was night, the
vulture would have fed on the carcass instead.]. In their midst, he brought them supreme
words that were like amrita. For his own objectives, the jackal made those relatives stay.

'"The vulture said, 'This place is full of the spirits of the dead and is frequented by yakshas and rakshasas. It is a
terrible and desolate spot and echoes with the screeches of owls. It is fierce and extremely horrible, with a complexion like that of dark and blue clouds. Abandon the corpse and decide to perform the funeral rites. As long as
the sun has not set and as long as the directions are clear, abandon him and decide to perform the funeral rites.
Hawks are shrieking in harsh tones. Jackals are screaming in fierce tones. Lions are roaring and the sun is about to
set. The blue smoke from funeral pyres is imparting a hue to the trees. Hungry beings are finding delight in this
cremation ground. In this extremely terrible spot, all of them are brave and energetic. They are malformed and subsist on flesh. They will attack you. Go far away from this spot in the forest. There is fear here. He is like a piece of
wood and must be abandoned. Tolerate the jackal's words. If you deviate from knowledge and listen to the futile
and false words of the jackal, all of you will be destroyed.'

'"The jackal said, 'Remain here. As long as the sun is shining, there is nothing to be scared about. Driven by affection for your son, as long as you have hope, remain here. Without any fear, confidently weep over him. Confidently, look at him with affection. As long as the sun is here, remain here. What is the point to the words of that
predator[The vulture.]? If you accept the fierce and wild words of the vulture, you will delude your own selves and your son
will indeed have no future.'"

'Bhishma said, "The vulture said the sun had set. The jackal said that it had not set. They were both hungry and
addressed the relatives of the dead person. O king! Both the vulture and the jackal were accomplished in attaining
their own objectives. They were hungry, thirsty and exhausted and spoke, seeking support in the sacred texts. Both
the jackal and the bird were knowledgeable and learned. Their words were like amrita. They[The relatives.] stood up and left.
Then they were overcome by sorrow and misery and wept and remained. They[The vulture and the jackal.] were skilled in attaining their
own objective. They were accomplished in speaking respectfully. Both of them spoke about knowledge and learning. The relatives were confused and remained there. At that time, Shankara approached. The wielder of the trident
spoke these words to the men. 'I am the one who grants boons.' Having been thus addressed, those miserable ones
bowed down and remained standing there. They said, 'All of us have been deprived of our single son. We desire
his life. You should grant us life by granting that our son becomes alive.' Having been thus addressed, the illustrious one filled his hand with water and granted the child a lifespan of one hundred years. The illustrious one, the
wielder of pinaka who was engaged in the welfare of all beings, also granted the jackal and the vulture the boon
that they should no longer suffer from hunger. They were full of joy at this great benefit and bowed down to the
god. O lord! They were delighted and happy that their objectives had been accomplished and stood there. Through
a long period of faith and certain and firm devotion, and through the grace of the god of the gods, fruits are swiftly
obtained. Behold the god's decision and the determination of the relatives. The tears of the miserable and weeping
ones were wiped away. Behold. Certain in their pursuit and through the favours of Shankara, the miserable ones
obtained happiness in a short period of time. At their son coming to life again, they were amazed and delighted. O
best among the Bharata lineage! All of this was possible because of Shankara's favours. O king! They heard from
Bhava[Shiva.] about how sorrow can be countered. Taking their son with them, they were filled with joy and entered
their city. This is the intelligence that has been indicated for the four varnas. This is the auspicious history, full of
dharma, artha and moksha. If a man hears this, he obtains delight in this world and in the next."'
