Vaishampayana said, 'Then Adhokshaja[Vishnu's name, and thus Krishna's too.], descendant of the Yadu lineage and eloquent in speech, spoke to King
Jarasandha, who had resolved to do battle. "O king! With which one of us three have you made up your mind to
fight? Who among us should be ready for the battle?" O king! Having been thus addressed by Krishna, the immensely radiant Magadha Jarasandha decided to do battle with Bhimasena. The priest brought chief herbs for alleviating pain and restoring consciousness to Jarasandha, who was impatient for the fight. A famous and learned
brahmana performed the benedictions. In accordance with the dharma of kshatriyas, Jarasandha dressed himself
appropriately. He removed his crown and tied up his hair. Jarasandha arose like an ocean that bursts through the
shoreline. The intelligent king spoke to Bhima, whose valour was terrible. "O Bhima! I will fight with you. It is
better to be vanquished by a superior one." Having said this, the immensely energetic Jarasandha, conqueror of enemies, rushed at Bhimasena, like the demon Bali once rushed at Shakra.

'After consultations with Krishna, the powerful Bhimasena had also had benedictions performed and, eager to
fight, advanced towards Jarasandha. Those two supreme warriors, tigers among men and armed only with their
bare arms, engaged each other, extremely eager and each desiring to defeat the other. The sounds of grasping,
holding and releasing of the arms then resounded with a terrible roar, like the roar of thunderbolts striking mountains. Both of them were the strongest among those who were strong and were supreme in their eagerness. Desiring victory, each sought to exploit weaknesses in the other. O king! This duel between the powerful ones was like
that between Vasava and Vritra and the terrible duel sometimes drove away the crowds that were near[A crowd had assembled to watch the duel and people had to back off if the wrestlers approached too close.]. They
pulled each other forward and broke away from each other's holds. They threw the other one down and to the
sides, dragging and grabbing the thighs. They insulted each other in loud words. They struck each other with rocklike blows. With broad shoulders and long arms, the two skilled fighters rained blows on each other with arms that
were like iron clubs.

'The duel started on the first day of the month of Kartika. Ceaselessly, it went on day and night. The great-
souled fighters were still engaged on the thirteenth day. But on the night of the fourteenth day, the Magadha withdrew, as he was exhausted. O king! On seeing that the king was tired, Janardana spoke, as if to Bhima of the terrible deeds[That is, Krishna didn't directly speak to Bhima what he intended. Directly advising a warrior engaged in a
duel would have been improper. Krishna offered advice that seemingly meant one thing, but reading between the
lines, was interpreted by Bhima the way Krishna meant it to be interpreted. Bhima understood that Jarasandha was
now weakened.]. "O Kounteya[Kunti's son and, in this context, Bhima.]! One should not press down on an enemy who is weakened in battle. If pressed down
at such a time, he might completely give up his soul. O Kounteya! Therefore, you should not press down upon the
king. O bull among the Bharatas! Fight him with your arms, so that he can be an equal." From these words of
Krishna, the Pandava[Bhima.], the destroyer of enemy warriors, got to know Jarasandha's weakness and determined to
kill him. Vrikodara, descendant of the Kuru lineage and chief among those who are strong, then seized the unvanquished Jarasandha, with the intention of vanquishing him.'
