Shuka asked, 'The words of the Vedas talk about undertaking tasks and also about renouncing them. Where
do those who pursue knowledge go[That is, those who do not undertake the rites.]? Where do those who act go? I wish to hear about this. Please tell me
about this. These two kinds of instructions seem to be similar and also contradictory.'"

'Bhishma said, "Thus addressed, Parashara's son spoke these words to his son[Vedavyasa was the son of the sage Parashara.]. 'I will tell you about the paths
of  tasks  and  knowledge  and  also  about  the  destructible  and  the  indestructible,  about  where  those  who  pursue
knowledge go, and about the destination of those who undertake rites. O son! Listen single-mindedly to the mysteries of one and the other. Listen to dharma, as stated by the believers, and also to what the non-believers say[Believers in the rites and those who do not believe in the rites.].
Both sides may seem to be similar, but there are differences between them. There are two paths on which the
Vedas are established. There is dharma with characteristics of pravritti, and nivritti is also well spoken of[In this context, pravritti is attachment to action and nivritti is detachment.]. A being is bound down through deeds and is freed through knowledge. Therefore, those who are far-sighted do not undertake any tasks. After death, one is born  again through deeds and adopts a form with the sixteen attributes.
Through knowledge, one becomes part of the eternal and umanifest one, the one without decay and transformation.
Therefore, men who are limited in intelligence praise deeds alone. They find pleasure and worship this net of bodily entities. However, there are also those who are supreme in intelligence, accomplished in the sight of dharma.
They do not praise deeds, just as a person who drinks water does not praise wells and rivers. Deeds lead to fruits,
happiness and unhappiness, existence and non-existence. However, a person who obtains knowledge reaches the
spot where there is no reason to grieve. Once one goes there, one does not die. Once one goes there, one is not
born. Once once goes there, one does not decay. Once one goes there, one does not increase. That is the supreme
brahman, eternal, unmanifest and without decay. It is without any obstructions. It is without any exertion. It is immortal. It is without destruction. Opposite sentiments do not bind down a person there, in thoughts or in deeds. He
is equal and friendly towards everyone, engaged in the welfare of all beings. O son! There is a difference between
a man who is full of knowledge and one who is full of deeds. Know that he[A man who has obtained knowledge.] can be seen to be as subtle as the
moon established in its kala[The moon is made out of sixteen kalas. These wax and wane, during shuklapaksha and krishnapaksha. On the
night of the new moon, the moon cannot be seen, but its kala still exists. A wise person is being compared to
this.]. The rishi[This is taken to be the sage Yajnavalka.] has spoken in detail about what has been inferred. A newborn moon
can be seen in the firmament, like a bent sliver. O son! Know that a person is embodied with the qualities of his
deeds and, with those eleven transformations in him, is endowed with the increase in kalas[A person engaged in tasks is being compared to the moon, with the fruits of those tasks contributing to growth
and decay, like the kalas of the moon. A person who has knowledge is freed from the kalas and the growth and
decay. The eleven transformations result from the five organs of sense, five organs of action and intelligence.]. The kshetrajna is the
divinity who finds refuge in the bodily form, like a drop of water on the petal of a lotus. A person who conquers
his atman through renunciation always knows this. Know that all beings are united with the qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas. The jivatman has these qualities. But know the jivatman to be the paramatman. Consciousness is
said to be the quality of living beings. It makes them endeavour in everything. Those who know speak about the
supreme beyond the body. The seven worlds flow from that[There are actually fourteen worlds (lokas), seven above and seven below. This is a reference to the seven above
-bhurloka, kharloka, svarloka, maharloka, janarloka, taparloka and satyaloka (brahmaloka).].'"'