Janamejaya asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! Having conquered the kingdom, the Pandaveyas were tranquil.
What did the brave Vasudeva and Dhananjaya do?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O lord of the earth! Having conquered the kingdom, the Pandaveyas were tranquil.
Vasudeva and Dhananjaya were delighted. They sported in pleasure, like the lord of the gods in heaven. They progressively sported in colourful groves, the slopes of mountains, colourful valleys, lakes and rivers. They were like
the two Ashvins in Nandana[Indra's pleasure garden.]. The great-souled Krishna and Pandava found pleasure in Indraprastha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They entered the assembly hall and sported there. O king! They conversed and recounted the colourful stories of the war and tales of the hardships. They spoke about the lineages of the rishis and
the gods. Those great-souled ones, the ancient and excellent rishis[Arjuna is identified with Nara and Krishna with Narayana.], were delighted.

'Keshava knew about the significance of everything and spoke to Partha. His words were colourful in purport,
meaning and diction. He spoke these gentle and wonderful words. Partha was tormented on account of grief over
his son and the death of thousands of relatives. Shouri Janardana comforted him with these words. The great ascetic knew about all the rites and comforted him in the prescribed way. After Satvata had removed the burden from
his mind, he rested for a while. When the accounts were over, Govinda spoke to Gudakesha. These words were
comforting and gentle. These words were full of reason. "O Savyasachi! O scorcher of enemies! By resorting to
the strength of your arms, the king who is Dharma's son has conquered the entire earth. O supreme among men!
Without any rivals, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira can now enjoy the earth, through the powers of Bhimasena and the
twins. O one who knows about dharma! It is through dharma that the king has obtained the kingdom, bereft of
thorns. It is through dharma that King Suyodhana has been slain in the battle. The sons of Dhritarashtra were addicted to adharma and greedy. They were always disagreeable in speech. They were evil-souled and have been
brought down with their relatives. O Partha! The entire earth is peaceful. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Protected
by you, the king who is Dharma's son is the lord of the earth and can enjoy it. O Pandava! With you, I have been
sporting in this forest. O afflicter of enemies! But where are the others? Where is Pritha? I am greatly attracted towards the place where the king who is Dharma's son, the immensely strong Bhima and Madravati's two sons are.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This assembly hall is like heaven. O unblemished one! It is beautiful and sacred and I have spent time with you here. O son of a brave father! O Kouravya! A long period of time has elapsed
without my seeing Baladeva and the other bulls among the Vrishni lineage. I wish to now go towards the city of
Dvaravati. O bull among men! It seems to me that you should also go. When King Yudhishthira was afflicted by
grief,  Bhishma  and  I  spoke  many  things  to  him.  The  virtuous  Pandava  Yudhishthira  ruled  according  to  those
words. The extremely great-souled one exhibited proper respect towards those words. Dharma's son knows about
dharma. He is grateful and truthful in speech. His mind is first fixed on truth and dharma. He is always established
in fortitude. O Arjuna! If it so pleases you, you should go to that great-souled one. Tell the lord of men that I wish
to leave this place. O mighty-armed one! Even if I am faced with the prospect of losing my life, I cannot do anything that causes him displeasure. How can I go to the city of Dvaravati without asking him? O Partha! With affection towards you and desiring your welfare, I have told you everything. O Kouravya! I have told you the truth. I
have never uttered a lie. O Arjuna! The reason for my residing here is over now. The king who was Dhritarashtra's
son has been killed, with his soldiers and his followers. O son[The word used is tata.]! The earth is under the subjugation of Dharma's
intelligent son. Pandava, king of the Kurus is instated there, with the mountains, forests and groves, with many
kinds of riches and with the ocean as a garment. The king knows about dharma. He will follow dharma and protect
the entire earth. He will be worshipped by many great-souled siddhas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He will
always be praised by the bards. You should now go with me to the king who is the extender of the Kurus. O tiger
among the Kurus! Having taken his permission, I will leave for Dvaraka. O Partha! I have always offered this body
and all the riches in my house to Yudhishthira. I have always loved and honoured the immensely intelligent Yudhishthira, the lord of the Kurus. O mighty-armed one! With the exception of you, there is no other reason left for
me to reside here any longer. O Partha! Your senior, Yudhishthira, is excellent in his conduct and the earth is established under his rule." The great-souled Janardana spoke in this way to the infinitely valorous Arjuna. O  king!
Though he wasn't happy, he reluctantly agreed and honoured Janardana.'
