Vaishampayana said, 'Having routed the enemy's soldiers and having conquered the cattle, Arjuna, the supreme of
archers, in a desire to do that which brought him pleasure, advanced in Duryodhana's direction. The cattle ran
away towards the Matsyas. Thinking that Kiriti had been successful and seeing him advance towards Duryodhana,
the foremost among the Kurus swiftly descended on him. Beholding their many soldiers, arranged in deep battle
formations, with many flags, the destroyer of enemies spoke these words to Matsya Virata's son. "Use these golden
reins to swiftly drive these white horses in that direction. Endeavour to quickly take me to where that mass of lion-
like warriors is gathered. That evil-minded son of the suta wishes to fight me, like an elephant against another elephant. O prince! Duryodhana's favours have made him insolent. Take me to him." Using the golden reins and driving the large horses that were as swift as the wind, Virata's son broke through that army of charioteers and bore
Pandava to the middle. On seeing this, maharatha Chitrasena, Samgramajit, Shatrusaha and Jaya advanced to help
Karna and countered the advancing Bharata[Arjuna.] with their arrows and spears. With the flames of his bow and the
scorching force of his arrows, that foremost among men burnt down the chariots of those bulls among the Kurus,
like a fire consuming a forest. A terrible battle ensued. Atiratha[An unrivalled warrior, whose valour is unlimited, greater than a maharatha.] Vikarna, foremost among the Kurus, fiercely
attacked Partha, Bhima's junior, from a chariot and showered down arrows on him. He[Arjuna.] drew the firmly stringed
bow that was embellished with the best of gold and routed Vikarna. He shattered the standard that was on his chariot. With his standard destroyed, he[Vikarna.] fled. Unable to control his anger, wishing to accomplish superhuman deeds
and seeing the oppression of the mass of soldiers, Shatrumtapa showered down arrows on the scorcher of enemies.
He hurled the nail of a tortoise[An arrow tipped with the nail of a tortoise.] at Partha. Pierced by that atiratha king and immersed amidst the flags of the Kurus, he pierced Shatrumtapa with five swift arrows and killed his charioteer with ten. Having been pierced by that
bull among the Bharatas, with an arrow that sliced through the armour on his body, the king[Shatrumtapa.] fell down dead on
the ground, like a tree[The word used is naga, which means tree, as well as rock or mountain. So it could also have been translated as
a rock being dislodged from the top of the mountain.] dislodged from the peak of a mountain by the wind. Those brave bulls among charioteers
were shattered in that battle by a braver bull among charioteers. They trembled, like a gigantic forest that shivers at
the time when a gale strikes it. Those foremost young ones among men were killed by Partha. In their fine garments, they seemed to be asleep on the ground. They were the granters of riches and were like Vasava in their valour. But they were vanquished by Vasava's son in battle. They were like grown elephants from the Himalayas, clad
in armour made out of iron and gold. Thus slaying the enemies on the field of battle, the wielder of the Gandiva,
foremost among men, began to roam around in that battlefield in different directions. He was like a forest fire at the
end of the summer. At the time of spring, the wind that blows in the sky scatters the leaves. Like that, Kiriti scattered his enemies and the atiratha roamed around on the battlefield on his chariot. Vaikartana's younger brother,
spirited Samgramajit, drove red horses and he killed those steeds. With a single arrow, he sliced off his crowned
head. On seeing his brother slain, Vaikartana, the suta's son, exhibited his valour, like a king of elephants displaying his tusks, or like a tiger attacking a large buffalo. Vaikartana attacked Pandava with twelve arrows. He pierced
the bodies of all the horses and that of Virata's son with those arrows. It was like a king among elephants being
struck by an elephant. He[Arjuna.] took out sharp arrows from his quiver and stretching the string of the bow right up to
his ear, pierced the body of the suta's son with his arrows. With arrows unleashed like lightning from his bow, the
destroyer of enemies pierced him in battle, in the arms, the thighs, the head, the forehead, the neck and in all the
parts of the chariot. Thus wounded by the arrows shot by Partha, and scorched by Pandava's arrows, like a swift
elephant that has been defeated by another elephant, Vaikartana fled from the forefront of the battle.'
