'Yudhishthira said, "O son[The word used is tata.]! Why are you speaking in this way to the terrified Kouravas who have sought refuge
with us? They are confronted with difficulties. O Vrikodara! Dissension and quarrels occur among those who are
related by blood. While enmity continues, the dharma of the lineage is not destroyed. If a stranger not related by
blood seeks to harm a lineage, those who are good do not tolerate that stranger's violence. The evil-minded one[Chitrasena.]
knows that we have been residing here for some time. But he has ignored us and done something that is unpleasant
for us. Through Duryodhana's forcible capture by the gandharva and through a stranger's oppression of the
women, our lineage has been sullied. O tigers among men! For the sake of those who have sought refuge with us
and to save the lineage, arise and get ready, without any delay. Let Arjuna, you, and the brave and invincible twins
free Dhritarashtra's son, Suyodhana, from captivity. O tigers among men! These chariots are stocked with all the
weapons. They have golden flags and are driven by Indrasena[Yudhishthira's charioteer.] and the other charioteers. O sons[The word used is tata.]! Ride them
and fight the gandharvas in battle. Ceaselessly endeavour to free Suyodhana. O Vrikodara! Every king will protect
one who has come for refuge, not to speak of someone as capable as you. Who can ignore cries for help and the
sight of hands joined in salutation, even if it happens to be a certain enemy? O Pandava! Out of granting a boon,
obtaining a kingdom, the birth of a son and freeing an enemy from misery, the last is superior to the other three.
What can provide greater satisfaction to you than that Suyodhana should be in distress now and that his life depends on the strength of your arms? O Vrikodara! O brave one! There is no doubt that I myself would have rushed
to help him, had the sacrifice not been going on[Yudhishthira is engaged in a sacrifice.]. O Bhima! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Try all the different means of conciliation to free Suyodhana. If the king of the gandharvas does not return him through conciliation, free Suyodhana through mild use of your valour. O Bhima! But if the Kouravas are not released through a
mild battle, use every means possible to crush those who are contrary. They must be freed. O Vrikodara! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am only capable of giving you instructions, as long as the sacrifice is going on."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words of Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira's name.], Dhananjaya agreed to his senior's[Yudhishthira is the senior.] words
about freeing the Kouravas. Arjuna said, "If the gandharvas do not free the sons of Dhritarashtra through peaceful
means, the earth will drink the blood of the king of the gandharvas." O king! Having heard the oath of the truthful
Arjuna, the Kouravas took heart again.'
