'Markandeya said, "The planets, the minor planets, the rishis and the mothers, all radiant and led by Agni, with
masses of attendants and many other terrible residents of heaven, established themselves around Mahasena, together with the groups of mothers. The lord of the gods wished for victory, but was unsure about victory[Victory over Skanda.]. He ascended Airavata's shoulders[Airavata is Indra's elephant.] and departed, together with the gods. Desiring victory over Mahasena, Indra travelled swiftly. The army of the gods was immensely radiant. It was terrible and extremely fast. It was adorned with
colourful flags and decorations and had many vehicles and bows. It was dressed in beautiful garments and was
adorned and served by prosperity. When Kumara saw Shakra advance, with the desire of killing him, he advanced.
The immensely strong Shakra roared and advanced swiftly. This delighted the army of the gods, who wished to kill
Agni's son. Worshipped by the thirty gods and the supreme rishis, Vasava approached near Kartikeya. Together
with the gods, the lord of the gods roared like a lion. On hearing this sound, Guha roared like the ocean. On hearing this great sound, the splendid army of the gods lost its senses. It was agitated, like the ocean by a storm.

'"Having seen that the gods had approached with the desire of killing him, Agni's son was angered. He belched
forth large flames of fire from his mouth. They burnt the army of the gods and made them writhe on the ground.
The heads and the bodies were in flames and the arms and the mounts were ablaze. They looked like radiant clusters of stars that had suddenly been dislodged. Having been burnt, the gods abandoned the wielder of the vajra and
sought refuge with Agni's son, thus obtaining peace. Having been deserted by the gods, Shakra hurled his vajra at
Skanda. O great king! This split open Skanda's right side. When the side of the great-souled Skanda was split from
the force of the vajra, another being was born. He was a youth, decorated in gold. He was clad in celestial earrings
and wielded a spear. Since he was created from the entering of the vajra, he was known as Vishakha[Vishakha is also one of Skanda's names. The word vish means to enter, and Vishakha is derived from that.]. On seeing
another one arise, like the fire of destruction, Indra was frightened. He joined his hands in salutation and sought
refuge with Skanda. O excellent one! Skanda granted him safety, together with his army. The thirty gods were delighted and played on their musical instruments."'
