Vaishampayana said, 'Having ascertained the thoughts of his brothers and those of the wise Narada, King Yudhishthira then spoke to Dhoumya, who was like the grandfather[Brahma.] himself. "I have sent into exile Jishnu, tiger
among men and for whom truth is his valour, the mighty-armed one whose soul is unlimited, for the sake of
weapons. O one rich in austerities! That brave one is devoted and capable. He is skilled in the use of weapons and
is like the lord Vasudeva himself. O brahmana! I know those two brave Krishnas[That is, Arjuna and Krishna.], the slayers of enemies, just
as the powerful Vyasa knows Pundarikaksha[The lotus-eyed one, Vishnu and Krishna's name.] Vasudeva and Dhananjaya of the three yugas[Satya, treta and dvapara yugas, kali yuga is still in the future.]. Narada also
knows this and has spoken to me about this. I know them to be the sages Nara and Narayana. Therefore, knowing
that he was capable, I sent Arjuna to set his eyes on the king of the gods and obtain weapons from him. He is capable, he is the son of a god and he is not inferior to Indra. That is the reason he was exiled. Bhishma and Drona are
atirathas[An unrivalled warrior, whose valour is unlimited, greater than a maharatha.] and Kripa and Drona's son[Ashvatthama.] are invincible. These immensely strong ones have been engaged by
Dhritarashtra's son for the war. They are all knowledgeable in the Vedas, they are valiant and they are all skilled in
the use of weapons. Then there is also Karna, the maharatha who is the son of a suta[A suta was the son of a kshatriya father and a brahmana mother and by profession sutas were charioteers.
But they were also bards and raconteurs.] and has the knowledge of
divine weapons. That immensely strong one has always wanted to fight with Partha. He has the speed of a horse
and the strength of the wind. His arrows roar from a flaming base. The dust[Of battle.] is like the smoke. Unleashed by the
wind of Dhritarashtra's son, his weapons scorch. He has been unleashed, like the flames of destruction at the end
of a yuga, released by time. There is no doubt that he will scorch my soldiers like dried grass. There is the wind
raised by Krishna, with a great cloud of divine weapons and with his white steeds like cranes. The blazing Gandiva
is like Indra's weapon[Here, Indra's weapon means Indra's bow, a term used for a rainbow. Since clouds are part of the imagery,
Gandiva is being compared to a rainbow.]. Only a shower of those arrows, unfurled from Arjuna's cloud can pacify in battle Karna's blazing flames. Bibhatsu, the destroyer of enemy cities, will certainly obtain from Shakra himself all the divine weapons and their knowledge. I keep thinking that he is equal to all of them. No one can act against him in
battle, nor will the enemies be able to react. All of us Pandavas will see Dhananjaya with the weapons that he has
obtained. Bibhatsu has never been seen to be dragged down under the weight of something he has undertaken. O
supreme among those who have two feet! But in this Kamyaka forest, in that warrior's absence and with Krishna
with us, we will never find peace of mind. Therefore, tell us of another forest that is sacred and lovely and has a lot
of food and fruit, frequented by the performers of virtuous deeds. We should be able to spend some time there and
wait for the brave Arjuna, for whom truth is his valour, to return, just as those desirous of rain wait for the clouds.
Tell us about the different hermitages that have been listed by brahmanas, about lakes and rivers and beautiful
mountains. O brahmana! Bereft of Arjuna, residence in this Kamyaka forest no longer seems attractive to us. Let
us go in some other direction."'
