'Droupadi said, "I bow before Dhata and Vidhata[Dhata and Vidhata are often synonyms, standing for the creator. To the extent they are being listed separately, Vidhata is more the creator and Dhata is more the preserver.], who have confused you. You should follow the conduct of
your father and grandfather. But your mind leads you in a different direction. A man never obtains prosperity in
this world through dharma, gentleness, forgiveness, uprightness and tenderness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Else, this miserable calamity would not have befallen you. Neither you, nor your immensely energetic brothers, deserve this. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then, and even now, they know that nothing is as loved by
you as dharma, which is more dear to you than even life. The brahmanas, the superiors and even the gods know
that your kingdom is for dharma and your life is also for dharma. I think that you can give up Bhimasena, Arjuna,
Madri's two sons and me, but you will never forsake dharma. I have heard from aryas[Signifying honoured ones.] that a king protects dharma and dharma in turn protects him. But I think it does not protect you. O tiger among men! Like a man is followed by his own shadow, you have always steadily followed dharma. You have never disparaged your equals or
your inferiors, not to speak of your superiors. Even after conquering the entire earth, your vanity did not increase.
O Partha! You have always served the gods, the ancestors and the brahmanas through svahas[Exclamations made when offering oblations to the gods.], svadhas[Exclamations made when offering oblations to the ancestors.] and
other forms of worship. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have always satisfied brahmanas, ascetics, those
who desire salvation and householders with every object that they desire. You have given forest-dwellers iron[The word used is louha and it can also be translated as copper.]
vessels. In your house, there is nothing to be seen that cannot be given to brahmanas. O king! Every morning and
every evening, at the end of the vaishvadeva ritual[An offering made to the vishvadevas, or gods in general, before meals.], you give to guests and servants and survive on what remains. Sacrifices to obtain wishes, sacrifices with animals, sacrifices to gratify desires, sacrifices connected with
cooking and other sacrificial tasks are always performed. Even in this great and deserted forest, populated by bandits, your recourse to dharma has not diminished, even though you have been deprived of your kingdom. You have
observed great sacrifices like the horse sacrifice, the rajasuya, the lotus sacrifice and the cow sacrifice and offered
large quantities of dakshina.

'"O king! But after that, your intelligence was confounded and you were vanquished in an unequal game of
dice. You lost your kingdom, riches, weapons, brothers and even me. You are upright, gentle, benevolent, humble
and truthful. How could this attachment to dice degrade your intelligence? On witnessing your great unhappiness
and your misfortune, my mind is agitated and extremely bewildered. I will recount an ancient tale to show how all
the worlds are under the control of the supreme god[Ishvara.]. Even before the seed is released, the lord Ishana[Ishana is being used here for the supreme god. Both Shiva and Vishnu are referred to as Ishana.] determines in advance happiness and unhappiness and pleasure and displeasure for all beings. O brave man! O king!
These subjects are like wooden puppets and he controls their bodies and limbs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Covering all these beings like the sky, the supreme god decides on all that is good and all that is evil. A bird
tied to a string is not its own master. Like that, they are under the control of the supreme god and are not their own
master or anyone else's. Like a pearl on a string, like a bull with a rope through its nose, a man is under the control
of the creator, is part of him and is given to him. Like a tree that has fallen from the bank into the middle of a river,
he is at no time under his own control. Creatures are ignorant. Their happiness or unhappiness is not determined by
themselves. They are sent by the supreme god to heaven or hell. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All beings
are under the control of the creator, like the tips of straws are under the control of the strong wind. Yet again, the
supreme god yokes himself to good deeds and evil ones. He pervades and roams in all beings, but is not noticed.
This physical body is only the field. It is only the creator's instrument and the illustrious one uses it to perform
deeds, good and evil. Look at the powers of maya the supreme god exhibits. He confounds them with illusion and
makes beings kill other beings. The sages who know the truth visualize this in a different way and alter their
course, like the wind in the sky. But men think of it in a different way and the lord creates and alters them in a different way. O Yudhishthira! Like wood is broken with wood, stone again with stone, iron with iron and that which
is insensate with that which has senses, like that, the great grandfather, the self-created one, the illustrious god is
not detected, and kills beings with other beings. The lord unites and disunites them, as he desires. The illustrious
one plays with all beings, like a child with his toys. O king! The creator does not act towards beings like a father or
a mother. Like an inferior person, he seems to be driven by rage.

'"My thoughts are agitated when I see that those who are good, righteous and modest suffer in their conduct,
while evil ones are happy. O Partha! On witnessing your calamity and Suyodhana's prosperity, I blame the creator
who tolerates such inequality. He confers prosperity on Dhritarashtra's cruel and avaricious son[Duryodhana.], who lowers
dharma and transgresses what the virtuous sacred texts say. What fruits does the creator obtain from this? If a performed deed follows its performer and no one else, then the supreme god has certainly been tainted by this evil
deed. Or if the evil that is done does not taint the performer, then strength alone is the cause of everything and I
grieve for those who are weak."'
