'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! There are brave ones who fight and do not retreat. When they die, what
worlds do they obtain? Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. O Yudhishthira! This was a conversation
between Ambarisha and Indra. Ambarisha, the son of Nabhaga, went to heaven, which is extremely difficult to obtain. In the world of the gods, he saw one of his advisers with Shakra. The lord was his own commander, situated
on a supreme and divine vimana that was full of energy everywhere and was progressively advancing upwards. He
saw that his own commander Sudeva, was progressively ascending upwards in great prosperity. Astounded, he
asked Vasava, 'In accordance with what is ordained, I have ruled the entire earth, right up to the frontiers of the
ocean. Desiring dharma, I have engaged the four varnas in what the sacred texts prescribe. I have observed terrible
brahmacharya and served the family of my preceptor. Following dharma, I have studied the Vedas and all the sacred texts meant for kings. I have served food and drink to guests and offered oblations to the ancestors. I have
studied under the rishis and have been initiated. I have served the gods through supreme sacrifices. Following the
sacred texts and the recommended principles, I have established myself in the dharma of kshatriyas. O Vasava! I
have glanced at armies and have been victorious in battle. O king of the gods! In earlier times, Sudeva used to be
my commander. He was a warrior with a calm soul. But how has he surpassed me? He has not performed the best
of sacrifices. Nor has he served the brahmanas. He has not satisfied them in accordance with the prescribed rites. O
Shakra! How has he surpassed me?'

'"Indra said, 'O son[The word used is tata.]! This Sudeva performed the extremely great sacrifice of a battle and so do other men
who fight. All armoured warriors who are at the front of an army are consecrated. They thus have the right to observe the sacrifice of a battle. This has been determined.'

'"Ambarisha asked, 'What are the oblations in that sacrifice? What is the clarified butter and what is the dakshina? Who are the officiating priests? O Shatakratu! Tell me this.'

'"Indra said, 'The elephants are the ritvijas. The horses are the adhvaryus[There are four types of officiating priests-hotar (one who recites from the Rig Veda), udgatar (one
who recites from the Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who recites from the Yajur Veda) and brahman (one
who recites from the Atharva Veda). A ritvija is an officiating priest in general. A sadasya is an assistant priest or a spectator.]. The flesh of the enemy constitutes
the oblations. The blood is the clarified butter. Jackals, vultures and crows are the sadasyas at the sacrifice. They
drink the remnants of the clarified butter and eat the remnants of the oblations. Large numbers of spears, javelins,
swords, spikes and battleaxes, flaming, extremely sharp and yellow, are the ladles at the sacrifice. There are
straight, extremely sharp and yellow arrows, keenly released with force from bows, terrible when they penetrate
the bodies of the enemy. These are the larger ladles. There are swords sheathed in scabbards made out of tiger skin.
The handles are made out of ivory and, in the battle, they are wielded by arms that are like the trunks of elephants.
These are the wooden sticks used to stir. There are blazing, sharp and yellow javelins, spears and battleaxes. They
are sharp and made out of steel and the blows from these are the riches. In the battle, blood flows down on the
ground. This is the complete oblation. This is a great and prosperous sacrifice and all the desires are satisfied.

"Slice. Pierce." These are the sounds that are heard at the vanguard of the army. These are like sama hymns sung
by reciters of the sama in Yama's abode. The vanguard of the enemy's forces is said to be the vessel for storing
oblations. The large number of armoured elephants and horses are decreed to be the shyenachit[When the kindling is piled up in the form of a hawk (shyena).] fire for the sacrifice. Among the thousands who have been slain, the headless torso of a brave one stands up. This is said to be the
octagonal khadira[A kind of acacia.] post used in the sacrifice. When the elephants are goaded by hooks and shriek, those are the
sounds made when ida oblations[Secondary oblations.] are offered. O lord of the earth! When palms are slapped against palms, this is
the sound of vashatkara[The exclamation vashat when oblations are made.]. In the battle, the sound of the large drum is said to be the three samas chanted by the
udgatar. In a battle, if someone is prepared to cast aside his beloved body because a brahmana's possessions are
being robbed, his own self is like a sacrificial post and this is a sacrifice with an infinite amount of dakshina. For
the sake of his master, if a brave person exhibits valour in the front of the army and does not retreat because of
fear, a world like mine is meant for him. There are blue swords that are shaped like the crescent moon. They are
wielded by arms that are like clubs. A person who strews the sacrificial altar with these obtains a world that is like
mine. If a person is focused on obtaining victory and does not glance to see if he has aides or not, immersing himself in the midst of the army, he obtains a world that is like mine. In the heap of javelins, the drums are like frogs
and tortoises[There is an imagery of a river.]. The bones of the brave ones are stones. It is impenetrable because of the mire of flesh and blood.
The swords and shields are like boats on the river. The hair is the moss and weed. The shattered horses, elephants
and chariots are passages. The banners and flags are the reed on the banks[Of the river.]. The blood from the slain mounts and
armies are the overflowing torrents in the river and it is impossible even for accomplished men to cross. In this inauspicious river, the slain elephants are the giant crocodiles that are borne along to the world of the dead. The
swords, cutlasses and flags are like ornaments. The vultures, herons and wild crows are like rafts. It is frequented
by those who live on human flesh and it causes terror to cowards. This river is said to be the bath a warrior takes at
the end of a great sacrifice. If a person strews the sacrificial altar with the heads of his enemies and heaps of horses
and heaps of elephants, his world will be like that of mine. The learned say that if a person regards the vanguard of
the enemy's army as his wife's chamber, his own army as the store of oblations, the soldiers to the south as
sadasyas, the soldiers to the north as the priest who kindle the fire and the soldiers of the enemy as his wife, he obtains all the worlds. When there are two vyuhas and a space between them, that is always said to be the altar for the
sacrifice and the three Vedas are like fires. When a warrior retreats in fear and is slain by the enemy, there is no
doubt that he goes to a fathomless hell. If he covers himself with blood from the force of that river, which is full of
hair, flesh and bones, he goes to the supreme objective. If someone slays a commander and climbs onto his chariot,
he treads with the valour of Vishnu and performs a sacrifice like Brihaspati. He who captures alive a leader[Of the enemy.] or
someone who is regarded as his equal, he obtains a world that is like mine. One should never sorrow over a brave
one who has been killed in battle. One should not sorrow over a brave one who has been slain, because he obtains
greatness in the world of heaven. One should not wish to offer oblations to such a slain one, or bathe, or perform
an act of purification[As part of funeral rites.]. Listen to the worlds obtained by him. If a brave warrior is slain in a battle, thousands of
supreme apsaras quickly rush towards him and say, "Be my husband." This sacred austerity is eternal dharma and
like the four ashramas for a person who does not run away from the field of battle. One should not kill the aged,
children[There is a typo in the critical edition. It reads balam, which makes no sense. It should read baalam.], women, brahmanas, someone with a blade of grass in his mouth[Symbolically, the person pretends to be a cow, as a token of unconditional surrender.] and a person who says, "I am
yours[Signifying surrender.]." I became the lord of the gods after killing in battle Vritra, Bala, Paka, Virochana, with his one hundred
kinds of maya, Namuchi, who was difficult to counter, Shambara, who had many different kinds of maya, the
daitya Viprachitti, all of Danu's sons[The danavas.] and Prahrada.'"

'Bhishma said, "On hearing Shakra's words, Ambarisha accepted them and himself obtained success as a warrior."'
