Vaishampayana said, 'Having taken his leave of Pritha and circumambulating her, Shouri Govinda, the destroyer
of enemies, went to Duryodhana's residence. It possessed supreme prosperity and was like Purandara's[Indra's.] abode.
Without being stopped by the gatekeepers, he passed through three rooms. The immensely famous one then ascended into a palace that was radiant with prosperity. It was like a cloud in the sky and arose like the peak of a
mountain. Surrounded by the Kurus and thousands of kings, he saw the mighty-armed son of Dhritarashtra seated
there. He also saw Duhshasana, Karna and Shakuni Soubala, seated near Duryodhana. Dasharha approached. The
immensely famous son of Dhritarashtra arose, together with his advisers, and honoured Madhusudana. Varshneya
Keshava met Dhritarashtra's son and his advisers and the kings and greeted them, in accordance with their age.
Achyuta seated himself on a golden couch that had been constructed well. It was strewn with many kinds of covers. After offering him a cow and madhuparka, Kourava offered Janardana his house and his kingdom. All the Kurus, together with the kings, honoured him and having seated himself, Govinda was as radiant as the pleasant sun.
Then King Duryodhana offered Varshneya, supreme among victorious ones, some food. But Keshava declined.

'In that assembly of Kurus, Duryodhana then spoke to Krishna. His tones were mild, but there was wickedness
in his heart. Glancing towards Karna, Kourava said, "O Janardana! We have offered you food, drink, garments and
beds. These have been brought for you. Why do you not accept? You have offered help to both sides. You are engaged in the welfare of both. O Madhava! You are Dhritarashtra's beloved relative. O Govinda! You know everything about dharma and artha. O wielder of the chakra and the club! I wish to hear about your reasons." Having
been thus addressed, the immensely intelligent Govinda, grasped his own mighty arms and replied in a voice that
sounded like a flood or a cloud. The words were completely articulated. They were distinct and were pronounced
correctly, without any slurring. The lotus-eyed one told the king these supreme words about his reasons. "Messengers enjoy and accept the honours when they have been successful in their objectives. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! You, together with your advisers, can honour me after I have been successful in my objective." Having
been thus addressed, Dhritarashtra's son replied to Janardana, "You should not act in this improper way towards
us. O Madhusudana! O Govinda! Whether you are successful or unsuccessful, we have tried to honour you and
have failed. O Madhusudana! We do not know the reason why you have done this. O Purushottama! We offered
you the homage in an act of affection. O Govinda! We have no enmity with you, nor any quarrel. Reflecting on
this, you should not have spoken as you have." Having been thus addressed, Dasharha Janardana glanced at Dhritarashtra's son, together with his advisers, and laughed and said, "I never transgress dharma for the sake of desire,
anger, hatred, self-interest in gaining objects, debate or avarice. Food should be accepted because of love, or because of necessity. O king! But I do not have affection for you. Nor am I in need. O king! Without any reason, you
have hated the Pandavas from birth. All of them are your brothers and possess all the qualities. They have acted
kindly towards you. This irrational hatred of the Pandavas is not warranted. The Pandavas are established in dharma. Who can speak against them for any reason? He who hates them hates me. He who follows them, follows me.
Know that I am immersed like a single soul in the Pandavas, who act in accordance with dharma. He who follows
desire and anger and, because of his delusion, hates those who possess qualities is known to be the worst among
men. He is confounded because of his avarice and anger. He is foolish in the way he regards his relatives who have
the fortunate qualities. He has not controlled his soul and has not been able to conquer his anger. His prosperity
will be swiftly destroyed. But one who possesses all the qualities and acts out of affection in the heart acts out of
affection and conquers everyone. Fame is established in him for a long time. I think that all this food has been
tainted and cannot be accepted. It is my view that I should only eat the food offered by Kshatta." Having spoken
these words to the intolerant Duryodhana, the mighty-armed one left the white mansion of Dhritarashtra's son. The
mighty-armed and immensely intelligent Vasudeva departed. He went to the abode of the great-souled Vidura.

'While the mighty-armed one stayed in Vidura's house, Drona, Kripa, Bhishma, Bahlika and all the Kurus went
to visit him. The Kurus told Madhusudana, "O Varshneya! We are offering you our gems and our houses." However, the immensely energetic Madhusudana told the Kouravas, "All of you must leave. I have been honoured in
every kind of way." When the Kurus had left, Kshatta made every effort, with every object of desire, to honour the
unvanquished Dasharha. Kshatta brought large amounts of food and drink that was pure and excellent for great-
souled Keshava. Madhusudana first satisfied the brahmanas with this. Krishna gave supreme gifts to those who
knew the Vedas. Like Vasava with the Maruts, he then enjoyed Vidura's pure and excellent food.'
