'Droupadi said, "How can a woman, who has Yudhishthira as a husband, not be sorrowful? You know all my miseries. Why are you asking me? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It burns me that an usher dragged me to an
assembly hall, in the midst of the courtiers, calling me a servant maid. O lord! Which other daughter of a king, but
for Droupadi, would wish to live like me, after enduring such miseries? When dwelling in the forest, who else but
me would endure being molested a second time by the evil-minded Saindhava[Saindhava is Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu.]? Barring me, who else can bear to
be alive after having been kicked by Kichaka with his feet, in the presence of the king of Matsya and while that
gamester looked on[The word used is dhurta, which has several meanings-one who is cunning, a rogue, a cheat or a swindler. But
it also means gamester, which is more appropriate, since the reference is to Yudhishthira.]? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have been tormented by several miseries like these.
O Kounteya! Don't you know them? How does it profit me to be alive? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O
tiger among men! The evil-minded Kichaka is King Virata's general and brother-in-law. While I dwell in the king's
residence in the disguise of Sairandhri, the evil-minded one incessantly addresses me, asking me to be his wife. O
destroyer of enemies! Thus addressed by one who deserves to be killed, my heart is bursting out, like a fruit that
time has ripened.

'"You should censure your elder brother, who is addicted to gambling. It is because of his deeds that I confront
these unending calamities. Who else but him, addicted to gambling, would give up his kingdom, all his possessions
and his own self, so as to spend a life in the forest? If he had played from morning till evening for many years and
wagered property worth one thousand nishkas[Nishka is a general term for gold, as well as a specific golden coin. As a golden coin, a nishka had different values and was not standardized.] each time, there would have been no decrease in the value of his
golden ornaments, golden coins[The text uses both the words rukma and hiranya. Both mean gold. We have loosely translated the first as ornaments and the second as coins, but it is possible that some other kind of difference is intended.], garments, vehicles, teams of animals, goats, sheep, horses and mules. Under the
guise of a gambling match, he has been dislodged from all his prosperity. He is now silent like a stupid person, reflecting about his own deeds. When he went out, ten thousand elephants, garlanded with gold and bearing the
marks of lotuses, followed him. He now earns a livelihood through dice. A hundred thousand infinitely energetic
men showed homage to the great king Yudhishthira in Indraprastha. A hundred thousand servant maids always
served him in the kitchen, with plates in their hands, serving guests morning and night. The supreme among generous ones gave away a thousand nishkas. He is now confronted with this great calamity because of his gambling.
Many bards and minstrels, with beautiful voices and adorned with decorated and bejewelled earrings, showed him
homage in the morning and the evening. One thousand rishis were always seated in his assembly hall. They were
rich in austerities and learning and all their wishes were attended to. Without any distraction, he supported the
blind, the aged, the unprotected and the destitute of the kingdom. Yudhishthira was always devoted to non-violence. He has now found hell as Matsya's servant. Yudhishthira calls himself Kanka, the gambler in the king's assembly hall. At the time when he lived in Indraprastha, all the kings brought him tribute. He now seeks a salary
from others. He was a protector of the earth and all the kings were under his suzerainty. The king has now lost his
powers and is under someone else's control. Like the one with the rays[The sun.], he dazzled the entire earth with his energy. But that Yudhishthira is now a gambler in King Virata's court. O Pandava! Behold that Pandava! He was one
whom kings honoured in his assembly hall, accompanied by the rishis. He is now seated below another. The immensely wise one now seeks livelihood from another. Who will not suffer on seeing the undeserving Yudhishthira,
with dharma in his soul, thus? The entire earth served that brave one in his assembly hall. He is now seated below
another. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Behold that descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am now like an unprotected one, having suffered from many such misfortunes. I am now in the midst of an ocean of grief. O Bhima!
Do you not see?"'
