'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When the atiratha Drona was killed there, what did those on my side and the
Pandavas do next?"

'Sanjaya replied, "When atiratha Drona was killed by Parshata and the Kouravas were routed, Dhananjaya,
Kunti's son, saw a great wonder that signified his victory. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He went to Vyasa,
who had come there, and asked him about this. 'O great sage! In the battle, while I was slaying the enemy with my
bright arrows, I saw a man advancing in front of me. His complexion was like that of the fire. In whatever direction he advanced, with a blazing and upraised spear, in that direction, the enemy was seen to be shattered. His feet
did not touch the earth and he did not hurl his spear. But because of his energy, thousands of spears were released
from that spear. He is the one who routed the entire enemy, though people think I routed them. From the rear, I
only pursued the soldiers whom he had scorched. O illustrious one! O great Krishna[Krishna was also Vedavyasa's name.]! Who was that supreme
being? Tell me. He had a spear in his hand and his energy was like that of the sun.'

'"Vyasa replied, 'That being is the first among the Prajapatis. He is the lord of all energy. He is the god of the
earth, the sky and heaven. He is the lord and god of all the worlds. O Partha! You have seen Shankara, Ishana, who
is the granter of boons. Seek refuge with the god who is the origin of everything. He is the lord of the universe. He
is Mahadeva. He is great-souled. He is Ishana. He is the matted Shiva. He is the three-eyed one. He is the mighty-
armed Rudra. He is the one with the tuft on his head. He is the one who is attired in rags. He is the one who is generous towards his devotees. Boons are obtained through his favours. The lord's companions are divine and have
many different forms. There are dwarfs, those with braided hair, those whose heads are shaved, those who are
short in the neck and large in the stomach. Others are giant in form, great in endeavour and some with large ears. O
Partha! Their faces and feet are distorted and their garments are strange. These are the ones who worship Mahadeva Maheshvara. O son[The word used is tata.]! He is Shiva. He is the energetic one. O Partha! In that fierce battle, when the body hair
stood up, it is he who preceded you through his favours. That army was protected by great archers and strikers like
Drona, Karna and Kripa. O Partha! Who other than that great archer and god could think of countering it, even in
the mind? When Maheshvara strides around in that form, who can venture to stand in front of him? He was the one
who was stationed in front of you. There is no being in the three worlds who is his equal. When he is enraged in a
battle, even his scent causes the enemy to lose its senses, tremble and fall down, slain in large numbers. The gods
who are stationed in heaven bow down before him. So do other men in this world and men who wish to attain
heaven. The god grants boons to his devotees. He is Rudra and Shiva, the consort of Uma. Through him, one can
obtain happiness in this world and attain the supreme objective in the hereafter. O Kounteya! Bow down before
him. He is eternal peace. He is Rudra. He is the one with the dark blue throat. He is the most subtle. He is extremely radiant. He is the one with knotted hair. He is fierce. His eyes are tawny. He is the one who grants boons. He is
the one who is towards the south. He is not manifest. He is the one with the hair. He is the one with virtuous conduct. He is Shankara. He is the object of desire. He is tawny-eyed. He is the being known as Sthanu. His hair is
tawny. He is shaven. He is lean. He is broad. He is the one who gives light. He is an excellent place of pilgrimage.
He is the lord of the gods. He is impetuous. He has many forms. He is Sharva. He is beloved. He wears excellent
garments. He wears a headdress. He has a handsome face. He has a thousand eyes. He is gentle. He dwells in the
mountains. He is peace. He is the guardian. He is attired in bark. His arms are golden. He is fierce. He is the lord of
the directions. He is the lord of rain. He is the lord of beings. Bow down before him. He is the lord of trees. He is
also the lord of waters. His form is covered in trees. He is in the midst of the soldiers. He is the one who bears
oblations to the gods. He is the archer. He is Bhargava[This is possibly a reference to Parashurama. However, Bhargava also means any great archer.]. He has many forms. He is the lord of the universe. He
is attired in rags. He has a thousand heads. He has a thousand faces. He has a thousand arms. He has a thousand
feet. O Kounteya! Seek refuge with him. He is the granter of boons. He is the lord of the universe. He is the consort of Uma.

'"'He is Virupaksha. He is the one who destroyed Daksha's sacrifice. He is the lord of subjects. He is terrible.
He is the lord of beings. He is without decay. His locks are matted. He moves like a bull. His navel is like that of a
bull. He has a bull on his banner. He is as proud as a bull. He is the lord of bulls. He is horned like a bull. He is a
bull among bulls. He bears the signs of a bull. He is as generous as a bull. He is a bull. His eyes are like those of a
bull. A bull is his weapon. His arrows are a bull. Bulls were created from him. He is Maheshvara. He possesses a
giant stomach. He possesses a gigantic form. He is seated on the skin of a leopard. He is the lord of the worlds. He
is generous. His head is shaven. He is the brahman. He is devoted to brahmanas. He has a trident in his hand. He is
the granter of boons. The lord wields a sword and a shield. He wields the Pinaka and a broken battleaxe[There must be a typo in the Critical edition. Why should there be a broken battleaxe? The text says khanda,
which can only be translated as broken. It should probably read khadga, in which case, Shiva wields a sword
and a battleaxe. However, a convoluted explanation is also possible. The battleaxe is broken (in the sense of no
longer being there), because Shiva has given it away to Parashurama.]. He is
the protector and the lord of the worlds. I seek refuge with that god. I seek refuge with the one who is attired in
skins. I bow down before the lord of the gods, who is the friend of Vaishravana[That is, Kubera.]. I bow down before the one
who is well attired, whose vows are excellent and who is a great archer. He is the one who bears oblations to the
gods with his hands. He is the one who cheerfully wields a bow. He is the archer. He is the arrow. He is the bow.
He is the preceptor in using the bow. He is the archer. He is the god who is fierce in his weapons. I bow down before the supreme among the gods. I salute the one with many forms. I salute the one who has many bows. I bow to
Sthanu, to the one who always has excellent vows, to the excellent archer. I bow to the one who destroyed Tripura.
I bow to the one who struck Bhaga[At the time of Daksha's sacrifice. At Daksha's sacrifice, Shiva was refused a share in the offerings.]. I bow to the lord of trees and the lord of men. I bow to the one who is always the lord of waters and the lord of sacrifices. He is the one who uprooted Pusha's teeth[At the time of Daksha's sacrifice.]. He is three-eyed.
He is the granter of boons. He is Nilakantha. I bow before the one who is tawny and whose hair is golden. The intelligent Mahadeva's deeds are divine. I will recount them, as I know them and as I have heard them. When he is
enraged, the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas and the rakshasas in the world can find no happiness, even if they
hide in caverns. Bhava destroyed the sacrifice[Daksha's sacrifice again.] in his wrath and later granted them freedom from fear. He released an arrow from his bow and roared loudly. At that time, the prosperous gods could find no peace. In his violent rage, Maheshvara destroyed the sacrifice. All the worlds were anxious when his bowstring thundered against
his palms. O Partha! The gods and the asuras succumbed and fell down. The waters were agitated and the entire
earth trembled. The mountains were shattered and the elephants in charge of the directions were confused. The
world was blind because of darkness and the light could not be seen. The radiance of the sun and all the stellar
bodies was destroyed. The rishis were frightened and sought peace and happiness for themselves, as well as for all
beings. They performed auspicious rites. Shankara laughed and advancing towards Pusha, who was then eating the
sacrificial cake, he uprooted his teeth. At this, the gods trembled and fled. They bowed down before him. He again
affixed and aimed a flaming arrow towards the gods and they decided that they would assign a special share for
Rudra in sacrifices. O king! In fright, the thirty gods sought refuge with him. Once his anger had been pacified, he
restored the sacrifice again. Because of that, the gods are afraid of him, even now. In ancient times, the brave asuras had three cities in the sky. They were large and splendid. One was made out of iron, another out of silver, and
the last out of gold. The iron one belonged to Tarakaksha, the silver to Kamalaksha and the splendid golden one to
Vidyunmali. With all his weapons, Maghavan was incapable of penetrating them. Oppressed, all the immortals
then went to Rudra and sought refuge with him. All those great-souled gods, together with Vasava, said, "O Rudra!
The animals fiercely slaughtered in all the rites will belong to you. O lord of the universe! Therefore, bring down
these asuras." Having been thus addressed and with the welfare of the gods in mind, he remained immobile for a
thousand years[Because of Brahma's boon, the three cities could only be destroyed when they came together in the sky. This
occurred once every thousand years. At other times, they circled independently. Moreover, when they came together, the three cities (Tripura) would have to be destroyed by a single arrow.]. When the three cities came together in the sky, he shattered them with an arrow that had three
barbs and three joints. The danavas in the cities were incapable of glancing at the arrow. It was made out of the fire
of destruction and the essences of Vishnu and Soma.

'"'Uma had a child on her lap and he had five tufts of hair on his head[This is an independent story. There is a shloka, excised in the Critical edition, which knits the two stories together by saying that Uma had gone to see the burning Tripura.]. She asked the gods, "Who is this?"

The lord paralysed the arms of the angry Shakra, with the vajra in his hand[This is abrupt. Shiva assumed the form of the child and Indra perceived him to be a threat. Therefore, Indra
tried to strike him with the vajra and Shiva paralysed his hand. The Critical edition excises shlokas which tell us
the gods went to Brahma in bewilderment and Brahma told them who the child was.]. This is the illustrious god. He is the
lord and master of all the worlds. With Prajapati[Brahma.], all the gods then went to the god who is the lord of the universe. He was like the rising sun in his splendour. Brahma approached Maheshvara. On seeing him and on knowing that he was supreme, the grandfather worshipped him. The gods gratified Uma and Rudra. The arm of the
wielder of the vajra regained its natural state. With his wife, the illustrious one, with the mark of the bull on his
banner, the destroyer of Daksha's sacrifice, the foremost among the gods, was pleased with the gods. He is Rudra.
He is Shiva. He is Agni. He is Sharva. He is everything. He is Indra. He is Vayu. He is the Ashvins. He is lightning. He is Bhava. He is Parjanya. He is Mahadeva. He is the unblemished one. He is the moon. He is Ishana. He
is the sun. He is Varuna. He is Time. He is the Destroyer. He is Death. He is Yama. He is day. He is night. He is the
month. He is the fortnight. He is the season. He is the twilight. He is the year. He is the Creator. He is the Ordainer.
He is the soul of the universe. He is the one who performs all deeds in the universe. Though he has no form, he is
the one who has the forms of all the gods. The god is praised by all the gods. He is one and he is many. He is in
hundreds. He is in thousands. He is in hundreds of thousands. Such is Mahadeva. He is the illustrious one who has
not been born. I am incapable of reciting all the qualities of the illustrious one. Those who are grasped by all the
planets[Evil planets.], those who are full of all kinds of sin, if they seek refuge with the one who is the recourse, will be freed
by the one who is easily gratified. He grants life, health, prosperity, wealth and splendid objects of desire to men,
and takes them away again. He pervades the world, engaged in good and bad for mankind. He is known as the lord
who grants objects of desire and prosperity. He is Maheshvara. He is the supreme lord for all beings. He pervades
the universe in many diverse kinds of forms. He is established in the ocean as the mouth of the gods[As the subterranean fire.]. This god
always resides in cremation grounds. This lord is worshipped in places where only brave ones go[The word used in the text is virasthana and the straightforward literal translation doesn't capture the complete
nuance. Virasthana can mean a place where only brave ones go to meditate, such as a cremation ground. It is
also a specific posture of yoga or meditation.]. His many
forms are flaming and terrible. In this world, men speak about them and worship them. In this world, he possesses
many names, signifying grave importance. They are based on his greatness, his power and his deeds. In the Vedas,
the great-souled and infinite Rudra has been praised in the supreme shatarudiya hymn[The shatarudiya mantra to Rudra is from the Yajur Veda.]. The god is the lord of
all desire, whether they are divine or human. The illustrious one is the lord of all the gods. He pervades the universe in his greatness. Brahmanas and sages praise him as the first among beings. He is the first among the gods.
The wind was created from his mouth. He always protects all animals and sports with them. Because he is their
lord, he is known as Pashupati[Pashu means animal and pati means lord.]. He is always stationed in the linga, engaged in brahmacharya. Because he
brings greatness to the world, he is known as Maheshvara[Maha means great and ishvara means lord.]. The rishis, the gods, the gandharvas and the apsaras
worship his linga, which is stationed in an upwards direction. Because of this worship, Maheshvara is gratified. He
is happy and gratified. Shankara is delighted. He has many forms, in the past, the present and the future, in the mobile and the immobile. That is the reason he is known as Bahurupa[Bahu means many and rupa means form.]. One of his eyes blazes and he seems to
have eyes in all directions. He consumes all the worlds in his anger. That is the reason he is known as Sarva[Sarva means everything. Sharva is the usual name for Shiva, meaning the destroyer.].
Because he adopts the form of smoke, he is known as Dhurjati[This is contrived. Dhumra is smoke. Dhurjati means someone who sports matted hair. There is no smoke in
Dhurjati.]. Because he is the god of the universe, he is
known as Vishvarupa[Vishva is universe and rupa is form.]. The three goddesses, the sky, the water and the earth, worship him as the lord of the universe. He is known as Tryambaka[The one with three eyes.]. He is always engaged in everything that is beneficial and every kind of
deed, desiring the welfare of men. That is the reason he is known as Shiva[Shiva means benign.]. He possesses a thousand eyes. He
possesses an infinite number of eyes. His eyes are in every direction. Because his greatness is in the universe, he is
known as Mahadeva[The great god.]. He is stationed in his linga form, flaming at the top. He is always the source of life and its
preservation. That is the reason he is known as Sthanu[Sthanu means fixed or motionless.]. He is in the bodies of beings, whether they are sound or
unsound. He is stationed in the wind and as the prana and apana breath of life in beings[The breath of life is prana and this has five actions-prana (exhalation), apana (downward inhalation), vyana
(diffusion through the body), udana (upward inhalation) and samana (digestive breath). Prana is a general expression for the breath of life, as well as a specific term for the act of exhalation.]. He who worships the
image of the linga, always obtains great prosperity, having worshipped the linga. Below his thighs, the lower half
of his body is fiery. The upper half is cool and auspicious[Literally, the text states that the moon is in the upper half.]. Half of his body is said to be Agni and half is said to
be Soma. His auspicious and great form blazes most in energy, among all the gods. Among men, his resplendent
and fierce form is known as Agni. He practises brahmacharya in that auspicious form. With his other terrible form,
he is the lord who destroys everything. He is the consumer. He is fierce. He is the powerful Agni, the consumer of
flesh, blood and marrow. That is the reason he is known as Rudra[Rudra means terrible.].

'"'O Partha! This was the god Mahadeva who was stationed in front of you. You saw the wielder of Pinaka in
the battle, destroying the enemy. In the battle, this was the illustrious god who advanced in front of you. He is the
one who gave you the weapons with which you destroyed the danavas[Shiva gave Arjuna weapons in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. O Partha! The sacred shatarudiya in the
Vedas praises the god of the gods. It is excellent, famous and brings life and all that is auspicious. It accomplishes
all desire. It is sacred and destroys all sin. It destroys all wickedness and dispels all kinds of misery. The hymn is
always heard by men in four different forms[The adjective 'four' is not very clear. The shatarudiya doesn't have four sections. Hence, this is probably a reference to the four kinds of rituals connected with the four kinds of Vedas.]. They triumph over all their enemies and attain the great world of
Rudra. The great-souled, auspicious and divine one acted thus in battles. He who reads the shatarudiya, or hears it,
is always uplifted. The god is the lord of the universe. A man who is always devoted to him, obtains the boon of
getting all the objects of desire. Such a man pleases Tryambaka. O Kounteya! Advance towards the battle. You
will not confront defeat. Janardana, your adviser and your protector, is by your side.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O destroyer of enemies! O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Having addressed Arjuna in the
battle, Parashara's son[Vedavyasa was the son of the sage Parashara.
] went away to the spot he had arrived from."'

This concludes Drona Parva.