'Dhoumya said, "I will now recount for you the sacred and purifying places that lie to the west, in Avanti. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is the sacred river Narmada that flows in a western direction. It has priyangus[Creeper believed to blossom at a woman's touch.] and groves of mangoes and groves of cane. The sage Vishrava's holy and famous habitation is there. The
lord of riches, Kubera, who has a man as a mount, was born there[Kubera is the sage Vishrava's son. His more common mount (vahana) is a mongoose. But he is also shown
with a horse or a man as his mount.]. There is a sacred and auspicious peak there,
by the name of Vaiduryashikhara[Literally, with vaidurya on its peak.]. It abounds in green trees and there are divine flowers and fruit. O king! On
the top of the peak there is the lake of a sage, with blooming lotuses and frequented by gods and gandharvas. O
great king! Many wonders are to be seen on that mountain. That sacred and celestial place is always like heaven
itself and is frequented by the devarshis. O destroyer of enemy cities! The rajarshi Vishvamitra's river is there and
that sacred river known as Para has many lakes and holy tirthas. Nahusha's son Yayati fell on its banks, in the
midst of righteous ones[The story of Yayati's fall is recounted in Section 1 (Volume 1).]. Though he fell, he again obtained the eternal words characterized by dharma. O son!
There is also a sacred lake and Mount Mainaka. There is also Mount Asita, with many roots and fruit. O Yudhishthira! O Pandava! Kakshasena's sacred hermitage is there and also Chyavana's hermitage, famous everywhere.
O lord! With a few austerities, men can obtain success there. O great king! There is also Jambumarga, the hermitage of rishis who have controlled their souls. O foremost among those who have pacified themselves! It is frequented by animals and birds. O king! O lord of the earth! There is Ketumala, which is most sacred and is always
crowded by ascetics and Medhya and Gangaranya. There is the famous and sacred forest of Saindhava, frequented
by brahmanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is the grandfather's[Brahma's.] holy lake, by the name of
Pushkara. This is the beloved hermitage of vaikhanasas[A vaikhanasa is a hermit or ascetic, a brahmana who has resorted to the forest.], siddhas and rishis. O best of the Kuru lineage! O
supreme among those who have performed good deeds! Prajapati himself chanted this verse in praise of Pushkara.

'If a wise person desires to go to Pushkara even in his mind, all his sins are destroyed and he finds delight in the
vault of the sky[Heaven.].'"'