Bhishma said, "O king! Having given up the state of being a worm, he became a kshatriya and followed that
dharma. However,  the  valiant  one  remembered  and  performed  extensive  austerities.  Krishna  Dvaipayana,
foremost among brahmanas and learned about dharma and artha, saw his extensive austerities and arrived there.

'"Vyasa said, 'O worm! The vow of a kshatriya is to protect all creatures. If you observe the vow meant for a
kshatriya, you will then become a brahmana. In your own self, know what is good and bad, and save all the subjects properly. Share everything that is auspicious. Purify everything that is inauspicious. Be cheerfully immersed
in your own soul. Follow your own dharma. Once you give up the body of a kshatriya, you will become a brahmana.'"

'Bhishma continued, "O Yudhishthira! He had actually retired to the forest. However, hearing the maharshi's
words, he returned and began to protect the subjects, following dharma. O supreme among kings! The worm continued to follow the dharma of protecting the subjects. After a short period of time, he died and became a brahmana. The immensely wise and immensely illustrious Krishna Dvaipayana saw the brahmana and again arrived
there.

'"Vyasa said, 'O brahmana rishi! O handsome one! Never be distressed. A person who performs good deeds obtains a good birth. One who performs wicked deeds obtains a wicked birth. O one who knows about dharma! You
will obtain the dharma that has been laid down in the sacred texts. O worm! Therefore, on no account, should you
ever be distressed at the prospect of death. The only fear is about the destruction of dharma. Therefore, follow
supreme dharma.'

'"The worm replied, 'O illustrious one! Because of what you have done, I have moved from happiness to greater
happiness. With the foundation of dharma, I have obtained this prosperity. My sins have now been destroyed.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Because of the illustrious one's words, the worm obtained the status of a brahmana, which
is extremely difficult to get. O king! He marked out the earth with many sacrificial altars. The excellent brahmana
then went to Brahma's world. O Partha! The worm obtained the supreme state of the eternal brahman. Because of
Vyasa's words, the fruits of his own deeds were extinguished. The bulls among kshatriyas have followed their own
natures and have been slain. They have obtained auspicious ends. O son! Therefore, do not grieve about them."'
