'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that the son of the suta had addressed harsh words towards his maternal uncle[Kripa's sister, Kripi, was Ashvatthama's mother.],
Drona's son powerfully raised his sword and rushed against him. Ashvatthama said, 'O Karna! O extremely evil-
minded one! O worst of men! O one with wicked intelligence! Behold. I will use this sword to sever your head
from your body.' O great king! On seeing him forcefully attack, King Duryodhana himself and Kripa, foremost
among men, restrained him. Karna said, 'O supreme among Kurus! This worst of brahmanas[Referring to Ashvatthama now.] is evil-minded.
He brags about his bravery in battle. Set him free and let him have a taste of my valour.' Ashvatthama replied, 'O
son of a suta! O extremely evil-minded one! This transgression of yours will be pardoned by us. But this increasing insolence of yours will be destroyed by Phalguna.' Duryodhana said, 'O Ashvatthama! O one who grants honours! Be pacified. You should pardon him. You should never be angry with the son of the suta. You, Karna, Kripa,
Drona, the king of Madra and Soubala have to undertake a great task. O supreme among brahmanas! Be pacified.
All the Pandavas are advancing in this direction, wishing to fight with Radheya. O brahmana! They are attacking
in every direction.' The valiant Karna, foremost among rathas, raised the best of bows. He was surrounded by the
foremost of the Kouravas, like Shakra by masses of gods. Resorting to the strength of his own arms, the energetic
one remained stationed there.

'"O great king! A battle then commenced between Karna and the Pandavas. They angrily rushed at each other,
roaring like lions. On seeing the mighty-armed Karna, in that great battle, they[The Pandavas.] let out a roar. 'There is Karna.
Where is Karna stationed? Karna, wait. O evil-souled one! O worst of men! Fight with us.' Others saw Karna and
their eyes became red with anger. They said, 'This son of a suta is limited in his intelligence. He deserves to be
killed by all these lions among kings. No purpose is served by his remaining alive. He shows extreme enmity towards the Parthas. This man has always been wicked. He bases himself on Duryodhana's advice and is the root of
all injury. Let us kill him.' Thus conversing, the kshatriyas attacked. Goaded by the Pandaveyas, to kill the son of
the suta, the maharathas enveloped him with a great shower of arrows. On seeing all those maharathas advancing
towards him, the son of the suta was not distressed. He was not overcome by fear. He saw that advancing ocean of
soldiers, like a city. He was powerful and undefeated in battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! For the sake of
your sons, the extremely powerful one, swift in the use of his hands, released a shower of arrows and countered
those soldiers in every direction. The kings also showered down arrows on him. They brandished hundreds and
thousands of bows. They fought against Radheya, like masses of daityas against Shakra. In every direction, the
lord Karna used his great shower of arrows to counter the shower of arrows that were released by the kings. As
they sought to counter each other's deeds, it was extraordinary, like Shakra against the danavas, in the battle between the gods and the asuras. We witnessed the extraordinary dexterity shown by the son of the suta then. Though
they strove in the battle, the enemy could not strike him. He repulsed the storm of arrows released by the maharatha kings. With sharp arrows that were marked with his own name, Radheya pierced yokes, umbrellas, standards and horses. Oppressed by Karna, the kings became anxious. At that time, they were like cows afflicted by the
cold. Horses, elephants and rathas were slain. We saw that large numbers of them were brought down by Karna. O
king! Heads and arms were strewn around in every direction. The earth was strewn with brave ones who did not
retreat. They were killed and were being killed. There were lamentations everywhere. With all those fierce warriors, the place looked like Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] city.

'"On witnessing Karna's valour, King Duryodhana approached Ashvatthama and spoke these words. 'In this
battle, the armoured Karna is fighting with all the kings. Behold. Afflicted by Karna's arrows, the soldiers are running away. They are like an army of the asuras, being driven away by Kartikeya. In this encounter, the soldiers can
be seen to have been defeated by the intelligent Karna. Look. Bibhatsu is advancing, wishing to kill the son of the
suta. Therefore, take appropriate steps, so that the maharatha son of a suta is not killed by Pandava in the battle.'

At this, Drona's son, Kripa, Shalya and maharatha Hardikya advanced against Partha, with a view to rescuing the
son of a suta. On seeing that they were advancing, Kounteya advanced against Karna, like the gods and the powerful Shakra against Vritra."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O suta! On seeing the angry Phalguna advance, like Death, what did Vaikartana Karna do
next? The maharatha has always sought to rival Partha. In an encounter, he was confident that he would defeat the
extremely fierce Bibhatsu. He now suddenly obtained someone towards whom he has always borne extreme enmity. O suta! What did Vaikartana Karna do next?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Pandava was advancing, like an elephant against another elephant. On seeing this, Karna fearlessly advanced against Dhananjaya. When Vaikartana's arrows descended with force, the energetic Pandava, the
scorcher of enemies, countered them. O venerable one! Karna enveloped him with a net of arrows. Extremely angry, he pierced him with his arrows. The immensely strong Partha could not tolerate his dexterity. The scorcher of
enemies released thirty arrows towards the son of a suta. These arrows were sharp, pointed at the tip, and sharpened on stone. Extremely enraged, the powerful and valiant one pierced him on the forefront of his left arm with
another arrow and seemed to be laughing. Having been pierced with great force, the bow fell down from his hand.
But in an instant, the immensely strong one[Karna.] picked up another bow and displaying the lightness of his hands,
shrouded Phalguna with a storm of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The son of a suta released a
shower of arrows. Dhananjaya smiled and countered that shower of arrows. O king! They showered down arrows
at each other. Those great archers enveloped each other, wishing to outdo each other's deeds. In that battle, there
was a wonderful encounter between Karna and Pandava. They were angry, like wild elephants driven by desire[Desire to have intercourse with the same she-elephant.].
On beholding Karna's prowess, Partha, the great archer, quickly severed the bow from his hand. With four broad-
headed arrows, he dispatched his horses to Yama's abode. The scorcher of enemies severed his charioteer's head
from his body. His bow was severed. His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. Partha, Pandu's descendant,
pierced him with four arrows. With his horses slain, that bull among men swiftly got down from his chariot. Afflicted by those arrows, he quickly climbed onto Kripa's chariot.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Radheya had been defeated and afflicted by Dhananjaya's
arrows, those on your side fled in the ten directions. O king! On seeing that they were running away, King Duryodhana restrained them and spoke these words to them. 'O brave ones! Do not run away. O bulls among the kshatriyas! Stay here. To kill Partha in this battle, I will myself advance. I will kill Partha, together with the Panchalas
and the Somakas. Today, I will fight with the wielder of Gandiva. Partha will witness my valour, which is like
Death at the end of a yuga. I will release thousands of nets of arrows. The warriors will see them in the battle, descending like locusts. I will shower down arrows from my bow, like from clouds at the end of summer. The warriors and the soldiers will see them. With my straight-tufted arrows, I will vanquish Partha in the battle today. O
brave ones! Stay in this battle and give up your fear of Phalguna. Phalguna will not be able to withstand my valour
today. I will be like the shoreline, holding back the ocean that is the abode of makaras.' Having said this, surrounded by a large army of soldiers, the king advanced towards the invincible Phalguna. His eyes were red with rage.

'"On seeing that the mighty-armed one was advancing, Sharadvata approached Ashvatthama and spoke these
words to him. 'This mighty-armed king is intolerant and has lost his senses because of his rage. Following the conduct of insects[Which approach a fire.], he wishes to fight with Phalguna. While we look on, he will give up his life before Partha. As
long as he is not within the reach of Phalguna's arrows, the Kourava king will be alive. O brave one! Quickly restrain him. Partha's terrible arrows are like snakes that have cast off their skins. Restrain him in this battle, before
the king is reduced to ashes. O granter of honours! While we are here and are looking on, he should not engage
himself. As long as his aides are here, the king should not fight with Partha himself. If Kouravya fights with Partha
Kiriti, I think it will be difficult for him to remain alive, like an elephant against a tiger.' Having been addressed by
his maternal uncle, Drona's son, supreme among the wielders of weapons, quickly went to Duryodhana and spoke
these words. 'O Gandhari's son! As long as I am live, you should not fight. O Kouravya! I have always desired
your welfare and you are disregarding me. You should not have any anxiety about defeating Partha. O Suyodhana!
I will restrain him. You stay here.'

'"Duryodhana replied, 'The preceptor[Drona.] protects the sons of Pandu, like his own sons. O supreme among brahmanas! You have also always been partial towards them. It is my misfortune that your valour in battle has always
been mild. Perhaps it is because of your affection towards Dharmaraja or Droupadi. I do not know. I am ashamed
because of my own avarice. All the relatives deserved happiness. But they confronted supreme unhappiness and
have been defeated. You are foremost among wielders of weapons. You are Maheshvara's equal in battle. O son of
Goutami! Had you so wished, you were capable of destroying my enemies. O Ashvatthama! Show me your
favours. Destroy those who are causing me injury. O unblemished one! Even the gods are incapable of remaining
within reach of your weapons. O Drona's son! Kill the Panchalas and the Somakas, with their followers, in the battle. Protected by you, we will kill the ones who remain. O brahmana! These Somakas and illustrious Panchalas are
angrily roaming around amidst my soldiers, like a conflagaration. O mighty-armed one! O supreme among men!
Restrain them and the Kekayas. Otherwise, protected by Kiriti, they will destroy us before that. O venerable one!
This is your task, regardless of whether you do it now or later. O mighty-armed one! You have been born for the
destruction of the Panchalas. O one without decay! You will make the world empty of all the Panchalas. The sages
who obtained success spoke about the future in this way. The gods, together with Vasava, are incapable of remaining within reach of your weapons, not to speak of the Parthas and the Panchalas. I am telling you this truthfully.'"'
