Vaishampayana said, 'The maharatha Kouravyas thus arranged themselves in battle formations. Arjuna approached
swiftly, his chariot uttering a roar. They saw the top of his standard. They heard the roar of his chariot. They heard
the terrible sound of Gandiva, when it was twanged. On seeing all this, and on seeing the maharatha, the wielder of
Gandiva, arrive, Drona spoke these words. "The top of the standard, which can be seen from a distance, belongs to
Partha. That noise is like that of a monsoon cloud and the monkey is roaring. The best of charioteers is stationed
on his chariot and he is supreme among charioteers. He draws Gandiva, the best of bows, with a sound like that of
thunder. These two arrows have fallen together at my feet. These two other arrows have passed me by, touching
my ears. Having dwelt in the forest and having accomplished superhuman deeds, Partha is now honouring me and
putting questions to my ears."

'Arjuna said, "O charioteer! Stop the horses at a place from where I can use arrows on that army, until I am able
to see that wretch among the Kuru lineage[Duryodhana.] in the midst of the soldiers. When I see that insolent one, I will ignore all the others and pounce down on his head. Then all of them will be defeated. Drona is stationed there and
Drona's son is after him. Bhishma, Kripa and Karna, great archers, are stationed there. But I do not see the king[Duryodhana.]
there. He must have gathered the cattle and left. Anxious to save his life, he must have resorted to the southern
road. Leaving the chariots and soldiers here, go to where Suyodhana is. O son of Virata! That is the place where I
will fight, because the battle there will not be without meat. Having defeated him, I will gather the cattle and return."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Virata's son carefully reined the horses. He used the reins to restrain them
from where the bulls among the Kurus were. He goaded the mounts in the direction towards which Duryodhana
had gone. Ignoring the assembled chariots, Shvetavahana left. Drona got to know his intentions and spoke these
words. "Bibhatsu does not wish to station himself here, when the king is far away. He is advancing swiftly. Let us
attack his flanks. When he is enraged, no one can fight him single-handedly in battle, other than the god with the
thousand eyes[Indra has a thousand eyes.] and Devaki's son Krishna. What will we do with these cattle and these great riches, if Duryodhana sinks like a boat in Partha's water?" Meanwhile, Bibhatsu went on and announced his name himself. He
swiftly covered the soldiers with arrows that were like locusts. Because of the mass of arrows unleashed by Partha,
the warriors were dispersed. They could not see the earth or the sky, because they were enveloped with arrows.
They had no inclination to fight. But nor did they have an inclination to run away. In their minds, they honoured
Partha's swiftness. He then blew the conch shell that makes the body hair of enemies stand up. He drew his excellent bow and incited the beings on his flag. At the sound of the conch shell and the roar of the chariot's wheels, and
those of the inhuman beings who resided on the flag, the cattle raised their tails up and wailed on all the sides.
They returned towards the southern direction."'
