The brahmana said, "The destruction that the Kurus confronted was not caused by Duryodhana, you, Karna or
Subala's son[Shakuni.]. We know it was destiny and no one was capable of countering it. Destiny is incapable of being
thwarted through manliness. O great king! Eighteen akshouhinis assembled. The bulls among warriors killed them
over eighteen days. O king! They were Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the others, the great-souled Karna, the brave
Yuyudhana, Dhrishtadyumna and the four sons of Pandu, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins. O king! This destruction of
people has been accomplished by the forces of destiny. In particular, in this world, there is no doubt that kshatriyas
and relatives of kshatriyas must be slain in a battle, using weapons. Those tigers among men possessed learning
and the strength of their arms. They destroyed everyone on earth, including horses, chariots and elephants. Your
son, the king, was not responsible for that crime against the great-minded ones. Nor were you or your servants responsible, or Karna, or Soubala. Thousands of kings and the best among the Kurus were destroyed. However,
everything was because of destiny. What else can be said about this? We hold the view that you are our preceptor
and the lord of the entire world. You have dharma in your soul. We forgive your son. With his aides, that king has
obtained the world meant for heroes. With the foremost among the brahmanas, let him enjoy happiness in heaven.
May you also obtain the auspicious and be established in supreme dharma. O supreme among Bharatas! May you
completely know everything that is sacred. The Pandavas are bulls among men. It can be seen that they are capable
of ruling heaven. Why should they then be unable to establish their status on earth? O best among those of the
Kuru lineage! The Pandavas possess the ornaments of good conduct. We, the subjects, will dwell with them in
prosperity and in adversity. Pandava[Yudhishthira.] protects like all the large number of kings who have preceded him. He gives
liberally to brahmanas. He is always far-sighted and firm in his wisdom. He is like Vaishravana[Kubera.]. Kunti's great-
minded son has advisers who are not inferior. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He is pure and compassionate,
even towards his enemies. He is upright and intelligent and always looks upon us as his sons. O rajarshi! Because
of their association with Dharmaraja, Bhima, Arjuna and the others will never act in a disagreeable way towards
the people. O Kouravya! They are gentle and mild, but like the venom of snakes towards those who are fierce.
They are brave and great-souled, engaged in the welfare of the residents. Kunti, Panchali, Ulupi and Satvati[Subhadra.] will
never do anything that goes against these people. Your affection towards us has been extended by Yudhishthira and
the residents of the city and the countryside will not disregard it. Even if these men engage in adharma, these virtuous maharatha sons of Kunti are always devoted to dharma and will protect them. O king! Therefore, do not have
any mental disquiet on account of Yudhishthira. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Engage in the acts of dharma.
We bow down before you."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'These words were full of dharma and possessed a flow of all the superior qualities.
Hearing them, all the people applauded and accepted them. Dhritarashtra repeatedly applauded those words. He
then gently dismissed all the ordinary people. They honoured the king and cast auspicious glances towards him. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! He also joined his hands in salutation and honoured the people back. With Gand-
hari, the king entered his house. Listen to what he did when the night was over.'
