'Bhishma said, "This one[Shishupala.] was born in the royal lineage of Chedi with three eyes and four arms. As soon as he
was born, he screamed and brayed like an ass. His father and mother, and their relatives, were struck with fear on
seeing his malformed body and resolved to abandon him. The hearts of the king, his wife, his advisers and his
priests were befuddled with anxiety. However, a disembodied voice spoke. 'O king! This son that has been born
will be fortunate and supreme in strength. Therefore, do not be scared of him. Carefully tend to the child. O lord of
men! His death will not be at your hands. The time has not yet come. The one who will bring about his death with
weapons has also been born.' On hearing these invisible words, the mother became anxious as a result of affection
for her son and said, 'With hands joined in salutation, I bow down before the one who has uttered these words
about my son. Please let him speak some more. I wish to know who will bring about my son's death.' At that, the
invisible voice spoke again. 'There is one on whose lap this child will be placed, whereupon the extra arms will
fall down on the ground like five-headed snakes and the third eye on the forehead will disappear. He will be the
slayer.' On hearing of the three eyes and four arms and the invisible words, all the kings on earth came to see him.

'"The lord of the earth showed them homage as they arrived, in accordance with what they deserved and placed
his son separately on each king's lap, one after another. But though the child ascended thousands of laps, what had
been said did not come to pass. Then the Yadavas Samkarshana[Balarama.] and Janardana went to the capital of the Chedi
kingdom to see the Yadavi who was their father's sister[Shishupala's father was married to a princess from the Yadava clan.]. Rama and Keshava honoured every king in accordance
with rank and superiority, inquired about everyone's welfare and seated themselves. After the two warriors had
been shown homage, the queen herself placed her son on Damodara's[Damodara is one of Krishna's names.] lap, with a pleasure that was more than
usual. As soon as the child was placed on his lap, the extra arms fell off and the eye on the forehead sank[That is, sunk into the forehead and disappeared.]. On
seeing this, she was miserable and frightened and prayed to Krishna for a boon. 'O Krishna! O mighty-armed one!
I am afflicted with fear. Please grant me a boon. You provide relief to everyone who is oppressed. You are the
refuge of everyone who is frightened.' 'Do not be afraid,' Janardana told his father's sister. 'O aunt! What boon
will I give you? What shall I do? I will obey your words, be it possible or impossible.' At these words, she told
Krishna, the son[The word used is nandana, meaning son. But the word also means someone (or something) that brings delight and pleasure. Therefore, it can also be interpreted as Krishna, the one who brings pleasure to the Yadu
lineage.] of the Yadu lineage, 'O immensely strong one! Please pardon Shishupala's transgressions.'

Krishna replied, 'O aunt! I will pardon one hundred offences of your son, even if they are offences that deserve
death. Therefore, do not grieve.' O brave one! Such is this evil king Shishupala, evil in intelligence. Insolent because of Govinda's boon, he can now challenge you[Bhishma is speaking to Bhima.]."'