Vaishampayana said, 'Then that destroyer of enemies vanquished Kumara Shrenimana and Brihadbala, the lord of
Koshala. In Ayodhya, the best of the Pandavas defeated, without having to perform very terrible deeds, the righteous and extremely strong Dirghaprajna. The lord then subjugated the land of Gopalakaccha, the northern Sottamas and the king who was the lord of the Mallas. Along the slopes of the Himalayas, the powerful one then ran
into Jaradgava and in a short while, brought the entire country under his power. The bull among men defeated
many countries in this fashion and conquered Unnata and the mountains of Kukshimanta. Pandava, great in valour
and supreme among those who are strong, defeated in battle Subandhu, the king of Kashi, one who never retreated
from battle. The mighty-armed Bhima, terrible in deeds and bull among the Pandavas, used his power to conquer
Kratha, lord of the kings in the region of Suparshva, in battle. Then he conquered the immensely energetic Mat-
syas, the immensely strong Malayas, the invincible Gayas and all the lands with animals everywhere[The text says pashubhumi, translated as the land (bhumi) with animals (pashu). It is perfectly possible that
there might have been someone named Pashubhumi.]. The
mighty-armed one repulsed Mardavika and Mahidhara and having marched towards the north, conquered the
foothills. The strong Kounteya used his strength to defeat the land of the Vatsas, the lord of the Bhargas, the lord of
the Nishadas and many other owners of the land, led by Manimana. Pandava Bhima then conquered the southern
Mallas and Bhogavanta, without having to expend terrible effort. The lord, tiger among men, used conciliation,
without the need for terrible deeds, to win over the Sharmakas and the Varmakasa and King Janaka of Videha, the
lord of the earth. Spending time in Videha, Kounteya Pandava defeated the seven lords of the kiratas in the region
around Mount Indra.

'After that, the valorous Kounteya defeated the Suhmas and the eastern Suhmas in battle[This broadly covers the territory of Bengal, that is, West Bengal and Bangladesh. It was to the west of Vanga.] and marched on towards Magadha. Defeating Danda and Dandadhara and many kings, he attacked Girivraja, with all of them on his
side. O king! Having subjugated Jarasandha's son and extracted tribute from him, the powerful one marched with
all of them against Karna[Karna was the king of Anga.]. The earth trembled with his fourfold army. The best of the Pandavas fought with Karna, the destroyer of enemies. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He vanquished Karna in battle and brought him
under his sway. He then defeated the powerful kings who lived in the mountains. Later, in a great battle, using only
the strength of his arms[Probably a wrestling match.], Pandava defeated the immensely strong Modagiri. O king! He then defeated the immensely strong and brave Vasudeva, the king of Poundra and the immensely energetic king who dwelt in the
marshes along the Koushiki[The name of a river, Koshi in Bihar.]. Both these warriors were terrible in valour and were surrounded by large armies. O
great king! He then attacked the king of Vanga[Bengal, specifically the eastern part, mostly in Bangladesh now.]. He vanquished Samudrasena and King Chandrasena, the king of
Tamralipta[Capital of the Suhmas. Tamralipta is identified with today's Tamluk. At that time, it was on the sea.] and Kacha, the ruler of Vanga. The bull among the Bharata lineage conquered the ruler of the Suh-
mas, all those who lived along the ocean and all the mlecchas.

'Having thus conquered many countries and extracting riches from them, Pavana's powerful son[Pavana is the god of the wind and Bhima was his son.] then reached
the Louhitya[The Brahmaputra River, so named because it had a reddish tinge.]. He extracted tributes and riches of all kinds from all the kings of the mlecchas who lived in islands
in the ocean-sandalwood, aloe, garments, the best of gems and pearls, gold, silver, diamonds and priceless coral.
They showered the Pandava[Bhima.], whose spirit was boundless, with great riches that amounted to hundreds of millions[The text says ten kotis and a koti is ten million.]. Returning to Indraprastha, Bhima, terrible in valour, tendered all those riches to Dharmaraja.'
