Ushanas said, 'I bow before the illustrious and powerful god Vishnu. O son! He holds up the surface of the
earth and the sky in his hands. O supreme among danavas! His head is the eternal region. I will tell you
about Vishnu's supreme greatness.'"

'Bhishma said, "While they were conversing in this way, the great sage Sanatkumara, with dharma in his soul,
arrived there, to dispel their doubts. The Indra among the asuras and the sage Ushanas worshipped him. O king!
The bull among sages then sat down on an expensive seat. When the immensely wise one was seated, Ushanas
spoke these words to him. 'For the sake of the Indra among the danavas, tell him about Vishnu's supreme greatness.' On  hearing  this,  Sanatkumara  spoke  words  that  were  full  of  grave  import.  He  told  the  intelligent  Indra
among the danavas about Vishnu's greatness. 'O daitya! Listen to everything about Vishnu's supreme greatness. O
scorcher of enemies! Know that everything in the universe is established in Vishnu. O mighty-armed one! He is the
one who creates all beings, mobile and immobile. In the course of time, it is he who withdraws them back and creates them again when the time arises. At the time of destruction, everything enters him. Everything is created from
him. Danavas are incapable of obtaining him through austerities or through sacrifices. One is capable of obtaining
him by restraining the senses. Both internal and external acts must be based in the mind[External acts are sacrifices and rites. Internal acts are in the form of purification inside. Provided these are done
well, they do help.]. If they are purified
through intelligence, one can obtain eternity. This is like a goldsmith purifying gold in the fire, using a great deal
of different efforts. A being may purify himself through one hundred births. But through limited deeds and a great
effort, another being may purify himself in a single birth. If the filth on the body is cleansed before it has become
thick, it requires only a little effort. In that way, one must make a great deal of effort to remove the taints. If a few
garlands are mixed with sesamum seeds, they do not shed their scent and become fragrant. This is the subtlety of
knowledge. A large number of garlands must repeatedly be mixed. Then the scent[Of the sesamum seeds.] goes away and the fragrance
of the garlands is established. Through hundreds of lives, one must seek for the qualities. One must use one's intelligence to restrain the taints and endeavour and practise. O danava! Listen to the reasons behind deeds, whereby
creatures become addicted to, or detached from, the consequences of those deeds. O lord! Listen with single-minded attention. In due course, I will explain how creatures engage in action and refrain from it. The illustrious lord,
Hari Narayana, is without a beginning and without an end. He creates all the beings, mobile and immobile. He is in
all beings that are mutable and immutable. He uses his rays to drink up the universe through his eleven transformations[The five senses, the five organs of action and the mind.]. Know that his feet are the earth and the firmament is his head. O daitya! His arms are the directions and
his ears are the sky. His energy is the sun and his mind is established in the moon. His intelligence is always in
knowledge and his juices are in the water. O supreme among the danavas! The planets are in the midst of his eyebrows. O danava! The nakshatras are his eyes and the earth constitutes his feet. Know that rajas, tamas and sattva
are Narayana's soul. O son! Know that the ashramas and the fruits of all deeds are his face. The supreme and undecaying one is also the fruit of not performing deeds. The metres are his body hair and the syllables are his speech.
The different kinds of modes and the various aspects of dharma are based in his heart. He is the brahman. He is
supreme dharma. He is austerities. He is the truth. He is shruti and the sacred texts[Shruti is sacred texts that are in the nature of revelation, but there are other sacred texts too.]. He constitutes the vessels
used in sacrifices, sacrifices and the sixteen officiating priests[There were four categories of priests-hotri, udhvaryu, udgatri and brahmana. While each of these was associated with one of the Vedas, in this case, the number four is probably being multiplied by the four Vedas.]. He is the grandfather. He is Vishnu. He is the
Ashvins. He is Purandara. He is Mitra. He is Varuna. He is Yama. He is the lord of riches[Kubera.]. Though he is seen as
separate, he is known as one. Know that this entire universe is under the control of that single god. O Indra among
the daityas! In all beings, he is spoken of as the single one. When a creature perceives this through his knowledge,
truth is manifested before him. Between creation and destruction, beings exist for one thousand crore and this is
also true of the others[Meaning, years. The text uses the word koti, naturally translated as crore. But this may very well be a mistranslation. A kalpa or period of creation lasts for one thousand divine years. Koti also means highest point or eminent position. So perhaps one thousand divine years is meant.]. O daitya! The measure of the duration of the creation of beings is in terms of many thousands of lakes. Each lake is one yojana in width, one krosha in depth and five hundred yojanas in length. The distance between one lake and another is one yojana. Let water be taken away from one of these lakes, using a single
hair and not a second one, with this being done only once a day. Know that the time it takes for all the lakes to be
dried up is the period of creation of beings, and destruction is of the same duration. There is supreme evidence that
creatures have six complexions-dark, smoky, blue in the middle, red, which is easier to tolerate, yellow, which is
extremely pleasant, and white[Implicitly, each succeeding colour is superior to the preceding one.]. White is supreme. O Indra among danavas! It is unblemished and without sorrow.
It is bereft of exhaustion and brings success. O daitya! A creature goes through birth in thousands of wombs before
it obtains success. Indra of the gods considered all the possible ends and also examined what the auspicious sacred
texts had said about the ends. The gods then decided that the ends of creatures were determined by their colour and
that their colour was determined by time. O daitya! A creature has to pass through fourteen hundred thousand existences[Lives.] and the number isn't unlimited[This has complicated interpretations and one shouldn't interpret this in the straightforward sense of number of
births. Five senses, five organs of action, mind, intelligence, ego and consciousness add up to fourteen. These
have hundreds of thousands of variations and a creature rises or falls, depending on how these behave.]. Know that depending on deeds, a creature can ascend, stay in the same
place or descend. The end obtained by a dark complexion is the worst. Such a person is submerged in hell and is
cooked there. It is said that the creature has to undergo hardships in that state for many thousands of kalpas. After
having been there for hundreds and thousands of years, the creature obtains a smoky complexion. The creature
dwells there helplessly, until the end of the yuga, with its atman enveloped in tamas. But when the creature is united with the qualities of sattva, it uses its own intelligence to dispel the darkness. It may then obtain a red complexion. However, if it is stuck with the blue, it circles around in the world of men[The preceding colours signify birth as non-human species.]. Bound down by its own deeds, it
is then afflicted by death and rebirth. However, when it attains a yellow complexion, though it is beyond immediate destruction, it still has to return[The yellow colour signifies the status of a god. However, divinity isn't permanent either.]. With that yellow complexion, it roams around for thousands of kalpas. O
daitya! But it has still not been emancipated and has to spend time in hell for a thousand and ten years. There are
still ends determined by nineteen thousand cycles of deeds[To the earlier fourteen, the five breaths of life have been added to get nineteen. Gods are still subject to these
nineteen and thousands of consequences resulting from deeds undertaken by these nineteen. Therefore, they are
still in hell.]. Know that one is freed from hell and every other
form of birth only through emancipation. A creature may roam around in the world of the gods. But when the merits decay, it is dislodged and becomes human again. After having remained a mortal for one hundred and eight
kalpas, it can become immortal again. However, if in that state[Of a human.], it deviates because of destiny, it obtains the status of a dark complexion and suffers from every kind of hardship. O brave one among the asuras! I will now tell
you about how a creature in the world of the living can obtain success, if it so desires. Through seven hundred different kinds of acts, a creature progresses from red to yellow and white[The five senses, the mind and the intelligence add up to seven. Each of these leads to hundreds of different kinds
of acts.]. Having finally united with white, it obtains and roams around in the supreme eight worlds[This probably means the worlds associated with the eight guardians of the worlds.]. These eight, or sixty, or hundreds, are extremely radiant.
But they are created by the mind[That is, these regions of bliss are not permanent.]. The white complexion is the supreme objective and its greatness is more than
that of the other three[These are sections that are extremely difficult to understand. The four states are of being awake (jagrata), sleeping with dreams (svapna), deep sleep without dreams (sushupti) and the supreme state of consciousness (turiya).
Turiya is superior to the other three. There are five elements, five senses, five attributes of the senses, five organs
of action, mind, intelligence, ego, consciousness and the gross body. When ignorance, desire, karma, the atman
and the jagrata state are added, there is a number of thirty. For the svapna stage, one similarly has another thirty,
adding up to sixty.]. Even if one transcends the kalpas, one dwells cheerlessly in the eight worlds or in the other four[Those other four worlds are those of mahar, jana, tapas and satya.]. The sixth complexion[White.] attains the supreme objective. Such a distinguished person obtains success and
is devoid of exhaustion. One can dwell cheerlessly in the seven superior worlds[Bbu, bhuvar, svar, mahar, jana, tapas and satya.] for hundreds of kalpas. When
this ends, one is born in the world of men, although one obtains greatness there. In due course of time, one transcends these and moves up in the hierarchy of creatures. For several kalpas, one dwells seven times in those superior worlds. If one can escape from destruction and misfortune there, it is possible that one might reach the world
of success. Those regions without decay are infinite and belong to Shiva, Vishnu, Brahma, Shesha, Nara, unadulterated consciousness and Para-Brahma. At the time of destruction, though their bodies are burnt, such subjects approach the brahman. All the various categories of gods also endeavour to obtain immortality in Brahma's world.
When it is time for creation after the period of destruction is over, all beings move to their designated regions. But
once the fruits are over, those regions terminate. So do those ends and they become like men. However, for those
who are progressively dislodged from the world of success[That is, those who have been emancipated. Because of their knowledge, they do not regress.], their end remains what it used to be earlier. When
there is creation after destruction, all superior beings obtain forms that are in conformity with their destinies. However, creatures who have obtained success retain their white complexion and both kinds of knowledge[Paravidya, knowledge about the self, and apara vidya, knowledge about the material world.]. Their
sentiments are pure and controlled and they see everything, as if with their own five senses[Supreme knowledge is as evident as if with one's own senses.]. Their ends are pure.
Their objectives are supreme. In their minds, they always think of what is auspicious. They obtain Brahma's world,
which is without decay. It is eternal and is difficult to obtain. O spirited one! I have thus recounted to you everything about Narayana's powers.'

'"Vritra said, 'Since this is the case, there is nothing for me to grieve. I can clearly see the truth in your words. O
one with a cheerful spirit! On hearing your words, I have become cleansed of all evil and sin. O illustrious one! O
maharshi! O immensely radiant one! The immensely energetic wheel[Of time.] is moving. The infinite and eternal Vishnu
is the spot from which all creation originates. He is the great-souled Purushottama. Everything in the universe is
established in him.'"

'Bhishma said, "O Kounteya! Having said this, Vritra gave up his life. He united his atman and obtained the
supreme region."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! In ancient times, Sanatkumara spoke to Vritra about an illustrious god. Is
Janardana that same person?"

'Bhishma replied, "With his own infinite energy, the illustrious one is the foundation. From there, the immensely
ascetic one creates many kinds of beings. Know that Keshava is not dislodged from his richness of turiya. The intelligent one creates the three worlds from his richness of turiya. Stationed at one end, at the end of a kalpa, he
transforms himself. The immensely strong and illustrious lord lies down on the water. From there, the one with the
cheerful soul roams around the eternal worlds. The great-souled one is not obstructed in his creation. Everything in
this wonderful universe is established in him."

'Yudhishthira said, "O one who knows about the supreme truth! I think that Vritra himself knew his end was going to be auspicious. O grandfather! That is the reason he was happy and did not grieve. O unblemished one! A
person who is white in complexion, a person who belongs to the white category and a person who is successful
does not return[There is no rebirth.]. O grandfather! Such a person is freed from hell and from birth as inferior species. O king! But a
person who has a yellow or red complexion has deeds that are enveloped by tamas and is seen to be born as inferior species. We are extremely afflicted. We are addicted to things that take us to the mouth of hardships and unhappiness. What ends will we obtain, blue or dark, the worst of them all?"

'Bhishma replied, "You are Pandavas and you have been born in a pure lineage. You are rigid in your vows.
Having obtained pleasure in the world of gods, you will again be born as men. Having enjoyed happiness as long
as creation lasts, you will return to the gods and enjoy bliss. In joy, you will be counted among the Siddhas. Do not
entertain any fear on this account. All of you will be unblemished."'
