'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Karna pierced Bhima with three arrows. He released many showers of colourful arrows. O great king! Pandava was struck by the son of the suta. But Bhimasena was not distressed and was like a
shattered mountain. O Indra among kings! In that battle, Bhimasena pierced Karna with a sharp, yellow and barbed
arrow. O great king! He brought down Karna's great and golden earring on the ground, as if a flaming stellar body
had been dislodged from the sky. The immensely strong Bhima seemed to be smiling. With another broad-headed
arrow, he grievously struck the son of the suta between the breasts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that
battle, Bhima again dispatched ten iron arrows. These were extremely forceful and were like Yama's staff. O venerable one! They struck the son of the suta on his forehead and thus released, penetrated like snakes entering a termite hill. With those arrows on his forehead, the son of the suta looked dazzling, as he had done earlier, when he
had donned a garland of blue lotuses[That garland had probably been around his forehead, rather than around his neck.]. In that battle, Karna, the wielder of a firm bow, was afflicted and enraged. Wishing to kill Bhimasena, he advanced with great force and speed. O king! O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! The intolerant and powerful Karna angrily dispatched one hundred arrows tufted with the feathers of vultures. However, in that encounter, the brave Pandava did not think about these. He ignored them and released a
fierce shower of arrows. O great king! Karna, the scorcher of enemies, adopted a fierce form and angrily struck
Pandava in the chest with sharp arrows. In that encounter, they showered down on each other, like clouds. They
terrified each other with the slapping of their palms. In that encounter, they enveloped each other with diverse nets
of arrows. In that battle, they wrathfully acted so as to counteract the other. The mighty-armed and great-souled
Bhima severed Karna's bow with a kshurapra arrow and pierced him with arrows.

'"The great-minded son of the suta discarded the severed bow and picked up another bow that was more forceful and was capable of bearing a great load. The son of the suta saw that the destruction of the forces of the Kurus,
Souviras and Saindhavas and that the earth was strewn with armour, standards and weapons that had fallen down.
In every direction, he saw bodies of elephants, horses and men that had lost their lives. A great and blazing anger
was generated in his body. He stretched his great bow, which was decorated with gold. O king! Radheya glanced at
Bhima with fierce eyes. As he angrily released his arrows, the son of the suta was beautiful, like the rays of the autumn sun when it has attained midday. O king! Adhiratha's[That is, Aadhiratha, or Adhiratha's son.] body was covered with hundreds of fierce arrows
and it looked like the body of the sun, with all its rays. He picked up arrows in his hand and affixed them. He
stretched his bow and released them. In that battle, no gap could be seen between these. O great king! Karna shot
arrows to the right and to the left and his bow was like a terrible circle of fire. The arrows released from Karna's
bow were extremely sharp and gold-tufted. O great king! They shrouded the directions and the radiance of the sun.
Those gold-tufted arrows with drooping tufts were released from the bow and were seen to traverse in the sky in
many ways. O kings! The arrows released from the bow of Adhiratha's son were as beautiful as an array of cranes
in the sky. They were tufted with the feathers of vultures. They were sharpened on stone. They were decorated
with gold and were extremely forceful. Those arrows released by Adhiratha's son flamed at the tip. They were decorated with gold and were released by the force of the bow. Many such arrows descended towards Partha's chariot.
There were thousands of them in the sky, decorated with jewels. Those arrows shot by Karna were like a storm of
locusts. As those arrows were continuously released from the bow of Adhiratha's son, they seemed to form a single long arrow in the sky. Like a cloud pouring down torrents of rain on a mountain, Karna angrily enveloped Bhi-
ma with a shower of arrows.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your sons, together with the Kurus, then witnessed Bhima's strength,
valour and prowess. That shower of arrows created by Karna was like an ocean. But he disregarded it and angrily
attacked him. O lord of the earth! Bhima had a large bow with a golden back. He stretched it in a circle and it
looked like Shakra's bow. The arrows released from it covered up the sky. Bhima's arrows were gold-tufted, with
drooping tufts. They were as beautiful as a golden garland that has been created in the sky. That net of arrows that
was spread out in the sky[Meaning Karna's arrows.] was struck and shattered by Bhimasena's arrows. In that battle, both Karna and Bhimasena created nets of straight-flying arrows that clashed against each other and produced sparks of fire. These
were gold-tufted and covered the sky, as they traversed through it. Disregarding the valour of the great-minded
one, the son of the suta used other arrows to envelope Bhima. O venerable one! Those nets of arrows created there
seemed to be like two storms of wind clashing against each other. Wishing to kill him, Karna used sharp arrows
that had been crafted by artisans and were decorated with gold and angrily shot these. But asking the son of the
suta to wait, Bhima used his own arrows to sever each of these into three fragments in the sky. Once again, Panda-
va showered down fierce arrows. He was intolerant, powerful and angry. He was like a fire that destroys everything. However, Karna showed no fear and received all these weapons with his own. As he fought with Pandu's
son, the son of the suta used the maya of his weapons and severed his quivers and his bowstring with arrows that
had drooping tufts. Vaikartana Karna then severed the harnesses of the horses. He killed his horses and pierced his
charioteer with three arrows. Descending, the charioteer swiftly fled towards Yuyudhana's chariot. Radheya was
angry and his radiance was like the fire at the time of destruction. He smiled and severed Bhima's standard and
brought down his flag.

'"O great king! Without a bow, he grasped a spear and angrily hurled it towards Karna's chariot[The text uses the word rathashakti rather than shakti. Shakti is a spear. However, rathashakti is the pole on a
chariot, used for holding up the standard. The subsequent shloka makes it clear that Bhima hurled a spear and
not a pole.]. As that
spear, embellished with gold and like a giant meteor, descended towards him, Adhiratha's son severed it with ten
arrows. O king! Having been shattered into ten fragments by Karna's arrows, it fell down. The son of the suta was
wonderful in fighting and was acting for the sake of his friends. Kounteya then grasped a shield that was embellished with gold and a sword, wishing for either death or victory, and advanced suddenly. O great king! But Karna
smiled and severed the shield. He was without a chariot and was senseless with anger. He hurled the sword towards Karna's chariot. The extremely sharp sword severed the bow and the bowstring of the son of the suta and
then fell down on the ground, like a snake that has fallen from the sky. Adhiratha's son laughed and wrathfully
took up another bow that was capable of killing enemies in battle and was more firm and more powerful. The angry Bhimasena was powerful and truth was his valour. He distressed Karna by leaping up into the sky. On witnessing the conduct on the part of the one who wished to be victorious in the battle, Radheya deceived Bhimasena by
hiding. His senses were benumbed and he hid on the floor of his chariot. On seeing this, he grasped his flagpole
and remained stationed on the ground[Bhima grasped Karna's flagpole.]. All the Kurus and the charanas applauded this attempt of snatching Karna from his chariot, like Tarkshya[Garuda.] grabbing a serpent. His bow was severed and he was without a chariot. But
he was devoted to following his own dharma. Turning his back towards his own chariot, he remained stationed on
the field of battle.

'"Wishing to kill him, Radheya again angrily attacked Pandava, who was waiting to fight in the battle. Those
two immensely strong ones encountered each other and challenged each other in that great arena. They roared like
clouds in the sky at the end of summer. Those two lions among men were excited and enraged. They were intolerant towards each other in the battle, like the gods and the danavas. Though his weapons were exhausted, Kounteya
was attacked by Karna. He saw the elephants that had been slain by Arjuna and they were as large as a mountain.
To create an obstruction in the path of the chariot[Karna's chariot.], he entered into their midst. He entered those elephants,
which were difficult for a chariot to penetrate. Wishing to save his own life, Pandava did not strike Radheya. Instead, Partha, the destroyer of enemy cities, raised an elephant that had been killed by Dhananjaya's arrows and
remained stationed there. However, Karna used his arrows to strike down that elephant. Pandava roared and hurled
the limbs of the elephant towards Karna. He also hurled wheels, horses, mounts and anything else that he could see
on the ground. Pandava grabbed these and angrily hurled them towards Karna. Karna used sharp arrows to sever
everything that was repeatedly hurled at him. However, remembering Kunti's words, he did not kill him[In Section 55 (Volume 4), Karna promised Kunti that he would not kill any of the Pandavas, with the exception
of Arjuna.]. Instead, Karna approached him and touched him with the tip of his bow.

'"Radheya laughed and repeatedly spoke these words to Bhimasena. 'Eunuch! Idiot! Glutton! You have no skill
in weapons, but wish to fight with me. You are only a child and become distressed in battle. O Pandava! You
should be where there are many kinds of food and things to eat and drink. O evil-minded one! You should be there
and should never fight. O Bhima! O extremely evil-minded one! You should become a hermit and live on fruit. O
Kounteya! Go to the forest. You have no skills in fighting. You should subsist on fruits and roots and in tending to
guests. O Vrikodara! I do not think that you are fit to raise weapons. You should collect flowers and live on roots
and fruits and attend to vows and rites. O Bhima! You should be in the forest. You are not skilled in fighting. O
son! You should not be in a battle. You should be exiled to the forest. O Vrikodara! In a household, you can only
urge cooks, servants, men and slaves to hasten in their tasks and are capable of reproaching them for the sake of
food.' O lord of the earth! In harsh words, he also reminded him about all the unpleasant things that were earlier
done to him during his childhood. As he weakly stood there, he again touched him with his bow and laughed. Vr-
isha again spoke these words to Bhima. 'Fight with others. Do not fight with the likes of me. Those who fight with
the likes of me have to face this and many other things. Go where the two Krishnas are and they will protect you in
this battle. O Kounteya! Otherwise, go home. O child! Why do you wish to fight?' O king! Having deprived him of
his chariot, Karna spoke these words to him, in the presence of the lion among the Vrishni lineage and the great-
minded Partha[Arjuna.].

'"O king! The one with the ape on his banner was urged by Keshava and shot arrows that had been sharpened on
stone at the son of the suta. Those arrows released by Partha were embellished with gold. They were shot from the
force of Gandiva and penetrated Karna, like swans into Mount Krouncha. Those arrows released from Gandiva
penetrated like snakes. Dhananjaya drove the son of the suta away from Bhimasena. His bow had been severed by
Bhima and he was afflicted by Dhananjaya's arrows. Karna mounted his giant chariot and quickly fled from Bhi-
ma. Bhima, bull among men, mounted Satyaki's chariot and followed his brother, Pandava Savyasachi, in that battle. His eyes coppery red in anger, Dhananjaya swiftly dispatched an iron arrow towards Karna and it was like Destroyer urging Death. That iron arrow, released from Gandiva, swiftly sped towards Karna, like Garuda descending
from the sky in search of a supreme serpent. Using his own arrow, Drona's son severed the iron arrow in the air.
The maharatha wished to free Karna from his fear of Dhananjaya. O great king! Arjuna angrily pierced Drona's
son with sixty-four arrows that were sharpened on stone. He asked him to wait and not run away. However,
Drona's son was afflicted by Dhananjaya's arrows. He quickly penetrated an array that was full of crazy elephants
and chariots. In the battle, the powerful Kounteya used the roar of Gandiva to drown the noises of all the other
gold-backed bows. Dhananjaya followed Drona's son, who had only gone a short distance away, and terrified him
with the strength of his arrows. He mangled the bodies of men, elephants and horses with his iron arrows, which
were tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. Arjuna crushed that army. O best of the Bharata lineage!
Partha, the son of the chastiser of Paka, slaughtered that force, with its horses, elephants and men."'
