'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Tell me about the signs on the chariots of those who angrily attacked Drona, with
Bhima at the forefront."

'Sanjaya replied, "Vrikodara advanced into battle on horses that had the complexion of antelopes[The horses were dappled.]. On seeing
him, Shini's brave descendant[Satyaki.] advanced on horses that were silvery. Nakula swiftly advanced against your army,
borne on handsome horses from Kamboja that were decorated with the feathers of parrots. Sahadeva was borne on
horses that were as dark as clouds. That tiger among men raised his weapons and advanced with great force, on
horses that were as fleet as the wind. Yudhishthira advanced on horses that were as fleet as the wind and were caparisoned with the best of gold. All the other soldiers followed him. King Drupada of Panchala advanced after the
king[Yudhishthira.]. A golden umbrella was held aloft his head and he protected all his soldiers. The great archer Shantabhi advanced in the midst of all the kings. He was yoked to beautiful horses that were capable of withstanding every kind
of noise in battle. Virata followed him, with all other brave maharathas. So did the Kekayas, Shikhandi and
Dhrishtaketu, surrounded by their respective soldiers. All of them followed the king of Matsya[Virata.]. Matsya, the
slayer of enemies, was resplendent as he was borne by supreme horses, with the complexion of patala flowers[Patala is a kind of rose or the trumpet-flower. The complexion is reddish pink.].
The king of Virata's son[Uttara.] was swiftly borne on swift horses that were yellow in complexion and were garlanded
with gold. The five brothers from Kekaya were on horses that had the hue of fireflies. All of them dazzled like pure
gold and possessed red standards. All those brave ones had golden garlands and were skilled in fighting. They
were seen to be armoured and showered[Showered arrows.] like clouds. Shikhandi, the infinitely energetic one from Panchala was
yoked to controlled steeds that were coppery red, like unbaked earthen vessels. Of the twelve thousand maharathas
from Panchala, six thousand followed Shikhandi. O venerable one! Shishupala's son, Dhrishtaketu, was a lion
among men. He was borne on playful horses that had the complexion of deer. That bull among the Chedis was
powerful. He was invincible and he advanced on horses from Kamboja that were dappled. Vrihatkshatra from
Kekaya was borne on excellent and delicate horses that were swift and from Sindhu. They had the hue of smoking
straw. Shikhandi's son, the brave Kshatradeva, was borne on horses that had eyes like jasmines. They had the complexion of lotuses, were adorned and were born in Bahlika. The young and delicate son of the king of Kashi was a
maharatha. He was borne into battle on supreme horses that had the complexion of cranes. O king! The prince Prativindhya was borne on white horses with black necks that were as swift as thought and were obedient to the driver[Prativindhya was Yudhishthira's son, Sutasoma Bhima's, Shrutakarma Arjuna's, Shatanika Nakula's and Shrutasena Sahadeva's. All five were Droupadi's sons.]. Partha obtained his son Sutasoma through Dhoumya[This Partha is Bhima. Dhoumya was priest to the Pandavas. He encouraged them to participate in Droupadi's
svayamvara and was also the priest when each of the five Pandavas were married to Droupadi. Having said this,
there is no particular reason to single out Dhoumya for Sutasoma.]. Horses that had the complexion of masha flowers
bore him into battle[Masha is wild bean and the colour of the flowers is whitish yellow.]. He possessed the radiance of one thousand moons. He was born in the city of the Kurus
named Udayendu. Having been born thus, in the midst of those of the lunar lineage, he came to be known as Suta-
soma[The text uses the word somasa. That is, Sutasoma was born in the midst of the Somasas. Some non-critical versions say Somakas. We have interpreted Somasas as those of the lunar lineage, since all the Bharatas were born
in the lunar dynasty. Sutasoma literally means the son of Soma (the moon) and Udayendu means the rising
moon. There is some problem with the text in this segment.]. Nakula's son, Shatanika, was borne on horses that had the complexion of shala flowers. He was worthy of
praise and was like the rising sun in his radiance. Droupadi's son, Shrutakarma, tiger among men, was borne on
horses that had complexions like the necks of peacocks and were caparisoned in gold. Droupadi's son, Shrutakirti,
was an ocean of learning[Shrutakirti is the same as Shrutakarma. This should probably read Shrutasena.]. He was the equal of Partha in battle[Depending on whether this is Shrutakarma or Shrutasena, the Partha in question is Arjuna or Sahadeva.] and was on supreme horses. These horses possessed hues like those on the feathers of blue jays. Horses with a tawny hue bore the young Abhimanyu into battle.
In his qualities of fighting, he was regarded as one-and-a-half times superior to Krishna and Partha. There was only
a single one among the sons of Dhritarashtra who had sided with the Pandavas in battle and large and gigantic
horses bore Yuyutsu into battle. The swift Vardhakhemi was carried into that dreadful battle on cheerful horses that
were adorned and had the complexion of strands of straw. There were horses with black feet, armoured with golden plates and obedient to the driver. These bore the youthful Souchitti into battle. There were controlled horses
with the complexion of red silk. Their backs were covered with golden plates and they were in golden harnesses.
These bore Shrenimana. The praiseworthy and brave king of Kashi was borne on the best of horses. These possessed golden harnesses and the complexion of gold and were ornamented. Satyadhriti was skilled in weapons, the
knowledge of fighting and in knowledge about the brahman. He was borne on red steeds. Dhrishtadyumna, the
commander of the Panchalas, had been given Drona as his share[Dhrishtadyumna would kill Drona.]. He was borne on horses that had the complexion of pigeons. Satyadhriti and the invincible Souchitti followed him into battle and so did Shrenimana, Vasudana
and Vibhu, the sons of the king of Kashi. They were yoked to supreme and swift horses from Kamboja, with golden harnesses. Each was equal to Yama or Vaishravana and could strike terror into enemy soldiers[The text is such that this can be translated as Vaishravana (Vishrava's son) Yama or Yama and Vaishravana
(Kubera).]. There were
six thousand Prabhadrakas from Panchala, with raised weapons. They were on the best of horses, with many hues,
and possessed golden and colourful standards on their chariots. They stretched their bows and released showers of
arrows that confused the enemy. They were determined to die together and followed Dhrishtadyumna. There were
supreme horses that were resplendent with a complexion like that of silk and possessed excellent golden harnesses.
They cheerfully bore Chekitana. Savyasachi's maternal uncle, Purujit Kuntibhoja, was on excellent and obedient
horses[Kuntibhoja was Kunti's father and Purujit was Kuntibhoja's son. By extension, Purujit is also being referred to
as Kuntibhoja, since he was Kuntibhoja's son. As Kunti's brother, Purujit was Arjuna's maternal uncle.]. They possessed the complexion of Indra's weapon[Meaning Indra's bow, that is, the rainbow.]. King Rochamana was borne into that battle on
horses that had the colour of the firmament, decorated with stars. Jarasandha's son, Sahadeva, was borne on the
best of horses, with speckled complexions and black feet. They were adorned in nets of gold. Sudama was borne
on swift horses that were coloured like hawks and had complexions like those of lotus stalks. Simhasena from Pan-
chala, the son of Gopati, was borne on horses that had the complexion of red antelopes, with white streaks on their
bodies. The tiger among the Panchalas was known by the name of Janamejaya[Not to be confused with the more famous Janamejaya who was Parikshit's son and to whom, the story of the
Mahabharata is being told.]. He was on supreme horses that
had the colour of mustard flowers. There were large and swift horses that possessed the colour of straw. They had
golden harnesses. Their backs were like curd and their mouths were like the moon. These bore Panchala[It is by no means obvious that this Panchala means Drupada. Drupada has already been mentioned and this
could be anyone from Panchala.]. There
were brave and gentle steeds that had the hue of reeds. These were as dazzling as the filaments of lotuses and they
bore Dandadhara. There were horses that were resplendent in golden harnesses, with stomachs with the complexion of chakravaka birds. These bore Sukshatra, the son of the king of Kosala. There were giant, speckled and controlled horses, caparisoned in gold. These bore Satyadhriti, who was skilled in fighting. Shukla advanced, with
everything of the same white colour-standard, armour, horses and bow. Samudrasena's son, Chandrasena, was
terrible in his energy. He was borne on horses that were like the moon and had been bred along the coast of the
ocean. Shaibya was wonderful in battle. He was borne on horses that possessed the complexion of blue lotuses.
They were ornamented in gold and had colourful garlands. Rathasena was invincible in battle. He was borne on the
best of horses, with a complexion like that of groundnut flowers, with white and red streaks on their bodies. The
king who slew the Patacharas is known as the bravest among all men. He was borne on horses with the colour of
parrots. Chitrayudha was adorned in colourful garlands. He possessed colourful armour, weapons and standards.
He was borne on the best of horses, with a complexion like that of kimshuka flowers. King Nila advanced, with
everything in an identical blue colour-standard, armour, bow, chariot and horses. Chitra advanced, adorned with
gems and with colourful guards for his chariot, standard and bow. His horses, standards and pennants were colourful. Hemavarna, Rochamana's son, was on the best of horses, with complexions like that of lotus leaves. Dandaketu was borne on gentle horses that were controlled by staffs that were like the stalks of reeds. They possessed the
complexion of the white eggs of hens. Horses with the complexion of atarusha[The medicinal herb Ailanthus excelsa.] flowers bore one hundred and
forty thousand foremost rathas who followed Pandya. The brave Ghatotkacha was borne by horses with many different colours and forms. Their mouths were of different types and he had the wheel of a chariot on his standard.

'"Yudhishthira was knowledgeable about dharma and the best of horses surrounded that best of kings from
every direction and followed him at the rear. They possessed golden complexions. There were Prabhadrakas on
well-trained and divine horses, with many different kinds of colours. They possessed golden standards and made
endeavours, together with Bhimasena. O Indra among kings! He was seen to be like Indra, with the residents of
heaven. Dhrishtadyumna was delighted that all of them were advancing together. But Bharadvaja's son surpassed
all those soldiers."'
