Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed, he[Shuka.] praised the supreme rishi and asked him about the pursuit of
moksha dharma.

'"Shuka asked, 'There may be a learned brahmana who has had offspring. He has performed sacrifices and has
become old. He is wise and devoid of jealousy. How can he obtain the brahman, which is so difficult for the mind
to grasp? Is it through austerities, brahmacharya, renouncing everything, intelligence, sankhya or yoga? I am asking you this. Instruct me. How can a man bring about unwavering attention in the mind and in the senses? You
should explain this to me.'

'"Vyasa replied, 'There is nothing other than learning and austerities. There is nothing other than the control of
the  senses.  There  is  nothing  other  than  renouncing  everything.  Success  cannot  be  obtained  through  any  other
means. Svayambhu created all the great elements first. These were then placed in the bodies of the living beings. It
is said that the bodies come from the earth, the essence from water and the eyes from light. Prana and apana have
the wind as their refuge and the vacant spots in the bodies have space as their refuge. Vishnu is in their steps,
Shakra is in their strength and Agni is in their bowels, desiring to eat. The directions are in the ears, with hearing.
Sarasvati is in the tongue, with speech. The ears, the skin, the eyes and the nose as the fifth, are said to be the senses of sight and it is through using these that knowledge becomes successful. Sound, touch, form, taste and scent as
the fifth are separate from the senses. They should be thought of as objects of sight. Like horses are controlled, the
senses must be yoked by the mind. The atman in the heart must control the mind. The mind is the lord of all the
senses and their objects. The atman and the mind ensure their creation and destruction. The senses, the objects of
the senses, nature, consciousness, mind, prana, apana and the soul always reside in the bodies of embodied beings.
But attributes, sound[That is, the senses.] and consciousness are not the base for knowledge. Knowledge is generated through energy,
never through the qualities. In this way, in the body, the seventeenth is surrounded by the sixteen qualities[The sixteen are the five senses, the five organs of action, the five elements and consciousness. The atman is the
seventeenth.]. Using
his mind, a learned brahmana sees the atman inside himself. It cannot be seen through the eye or comprehended
through all the senses. The great atman manifests itself through the lamp of the mind. It is without sound, touch,
form, taste and scent. It is without decay. It is in the body, but is without a body. It is beyond the senses, but can be
seen. It is not manifest, but exists in the manifest body. It is immortal, but resorts to a mortal body. A person who
beholds it obtains the brahman after death. A learned person looks upon a learned brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a
dog and an outcaste[Svapaka.] equally. The great atman pervades everything and dwells in all beings, mobile and immobile. The atman is in all beings and all beings are in the atman. A person who sees the atman in all beings obtains
the brahman. The extent to which one knows the atman in one's own self is the extent to which one knows the atman in the paramatman[This is a cryptic and difficult shloka and some liberties have been taken. The sense is that knowledge of the
paramatman is determined by knowledge of one's own atman.]. A person who always knows this, obtains immortality. He regards all beings as his own
self and is engaged in the welfare of all beings. He leaves no trail, like a bird in the sky or an aquatic creature in
the water, and the gods themselves are confused in trying to follow his tracks. A person whose tracks cannot be
seen is indeed extremely great-souled. Time cooks all beings, inside its own self. But that which cooks time[The brahman.] can
never be known. It does not exist above, or diagonally, below, to the side, or in the middle. It does not exist anywhere. Nor has it come from anywhere. Everything in this world is inside it. There is nothing that is outside it.
Even if one shoots one thousand arrows one after another, each endued with the speed of thought, even then one
will not be able to obtain the extremities of that which is the cause of everything. It is subtler than the most subtle.
It is larger than the largest. Its hands and feet extend in every direction. The eyes, heads and faces are everywhere.
The ears are everywhere in the world. It is established, pervading everything. It is smaller than the smallest. It is
larger than the largest. It is certainly seen to be established inside all beings. The atman has two attributes, indestructible and destructible. The destructible form is in all the beings. The indestructible form is divine and immortal. Having gone to the city with the nine gates[The body has nine gates-two eyes, two ears, one mouth, two nostrils, one anus and the genitals.], Hamsa[We have deliberately not translated this. While hamsa means swan, it is also used as an expression for the soul.] restrains and controls it. It is the lord of all beings, mobile and immobile. Those who are accomplished speak of the truth-it resorts to the nine, subject to destruction
and decay. But Hamsa is said to be without decay. It is mysterious and is Akshara[This is interpreted as signifying unity between the jivatman and the paramatman.]. The learned obtain Akshara
and give up life and birth[They go beyond the cycle of birth and death.].'"'