Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! I have heard from you about many fierce and terrible sorrows that are difficult to
tolerate and about the destruction of my sons. O suta! From what you have told me and from the way the war is
going on, it is my firm view that the Kouravas don't exist any more. In that great battle, Duryodhana was deprived
of his chariot. What did Dharma's son do then and what did the king[Duryodhana.] do in return? How did the battle that
makes the body hair stand up rage in the afternoon? O Sanjaya! You are skilled. Tell me all this in detail."

'Sanjaya replied, "The soldiers fought in accordance with their different divisions. O lord of the earth! Your son
resorted to another chariot. He was overcome by great rage, like a venomous snake. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! On seeing Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, Duryodhana quickly told his charioteer, 'O charioteer! Drive and
swiftly take me to the spot where Pandava is. The king is resplendent in his armour there and an umbrella is held
aloft his head.' Having been thus instructed by the king, in that encounter, the charioteer drove that supreme chariot towards King Yudhishthira. Yudhisthira was also angry and maddened, like an excellent bull. He instructed his
charioteer to go to the spot where Suyodhana was. The best of rathas, those two brave brothers who were immensely valorous, clashed against each other, armoured and invincible in battle. In the battle, those two great
archers mangled each other with their arrows. O venerable one! In that encounter, with a broad-headed arrow that
was sharpened on stone, King Duryodhana severed the bow of the one who observed dharma in his conduct. Yudhishthira could not tolerate this conduct and became enraged. In front of the army, Dharma's son cast aside that
severed bow and, his eyes red with rage, picked up another bow and severed Duryodhana's standard and bow.
He[Duryodhana.] picked up another bow and pierced Pandava back. Extremely angry, they showered down arrows on each
other. They wished to defeat each other and were as enraged as lions. They struck each other and roared like bulls.
The maharathas roamed around, glancing at each other. O great king! They drew their bows back to the complete
extent and wounded each other. They were as resplendent as flowering kimshukas. O king! They roared repeatedly
at each other, like lions. In that great battle, they made sounds with the slapping of their palms and the twangs of
their bows. O great king! Those best of rathas blew on their conch shells and severely wounded each other. King
Yudhishthira angrily struck your son in the chest with three arrows that were irresistible and had the force of the
vajra. Your son quickly pierced the king back, using five sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and sharpened on
stone. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Duryodhana hurled a lance. It was sharp, made completely out of
iron and like a giant meteor. On seeing it descend violently, Dharmaraja used sharp arrows to powerfully shatter it
into three fragments and then pierced him with seven arrows. That extremely expensive lance fell down, with its
golden handle, blazing like a giant meteor with trails of fire. O lord of the earth! On seeing that the lance had been
destroyed, your son struck Yudhishthira with nine sharp and broad-headed arrows. The foremost among scorcher
of enemies[Yudhishthira.] was powerfully and severely struck and quickly affixed an arrow in Duryodhana's direction. The
immensely strong and valiant king affixed the arrow on his fierce bow and angrily released it at the king[The two kings being Yudhishthira and Duryodhana respectively.]. That
arrow struck your maharatha son. Having robbed the king of his senses, it penetrated the ground. Duryodhana became angry at this and forcefully raised a club. He advanced against Pandava, wishing to bring an end to the
feud[If Yudhishthira was killed, the feud would end.]. With that upraised club, he was like Yama with a staff in his hand. On seeing this, Dharmaraja hurled a
giant spear towards your son. It blazed and was immensely powerful, flaming like a giant meteor. As he[Duryodhana.] was
stationed on his chariot, it pierced his armour in the great battle. Severely wounded and struck in the chest, he lost
his senses and fell down.

' "Kritavarma swiftly approached your son, as the king was immersed in an ocean of hardship. Bhima also
grasped a giant club that was decorated with gold and in that battle, powerfully advanced against Kritavarma. Thus
the battle raged between those on your side and the enemy." '
