Vaishampayana said, 'The sky was clear in the morning. On the instructions of Dhritarashtra's son, Duryodhana,
the kings advanced towards the Pandavas. All of them had bathed and purified themselves. They were garlanded
and were dressed in white garments. They wielded weapons and banners. Benedictions had been pronounced on
them and oblations offered into the fire. All of them were learned in the Vedas. All of them were brave. They were
excellent in the observance of vows. All of them had performed deeds. All of them possessed many auspicious
signs. They were extremely strong and wished to earn supreme worlds[After death.] in the field of battle. All of them were
focused in their minds and trusted each other. Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, the Kekayas and the Bahlikas-all
of them marched out, with Bharadvaja[Drona.] at the forefront. There were Ashvatthama, Shantanu's son, Saindhava
Jayadratha, rathas from the south, the west and the mountainous regions, Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, everyone
from the east and the north, Shakas, Kiratas, Yavanas, Shibis and Vasatis. Their own soldiers accompanied and surrounded the maharathas. All these maharathas marched out in the second division of the army-Kritavarma with
his soldiers, the immensely strong Trigartas and King Duryodhana, surrounded by his brothers. Shala, Bhurishrava, Shalya and Brihadbala from Kosala followed at the rear, with Dhritarashtra's son at the forefront. These maharathas desired to fight and were armoured. They advanced over the plain ground to the western[This can also be translated as towards the back of Kurukshetra.] side of Kurukshetra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duryodhana set up a camp there and with its decorations, it looked
like a second Hastinapura. O Indra among kings! Even skilled men who lived in the city, could not distinguish between the city and the camp. The Kouravya king constructed many other similar fortresses, in hundreds and thousands, for the kings. O king! The hundreds of dwellings of the troops stretched out on that field of battle in a circle
and extended over five yojanas[A yojana is a measure of distance and is between eight and nine miles.]. According to their energy and their strength, the lords of the earth entered their
respective camps. There were thousands of these and they were opulent. For those great-souled ones and their soldiers, and also for those who would not fight, King Duryodhana apportioned out excellent food. There were elephants, horses, men, artisans, others who followed, bards, singers, minstrels, traders, courtesans and whores[Two separate words are used in the text for courtesans, ganika and vara. These are synonyms. Some non-critical versions read chara (spy) instead of vara. Chara should probably be right.].
There were also those who had gathered as spectators. In the proper way, King Kourava attended to all of them.'
