'Bhimasena said, "Shame on the strength of my arms and on Phalguna's[Phalguna or Phalguni is Arjuna's name.] Gandiva! Your hands used to be red earlier, but are now covered in callouses. I would have created a great uproar in Virata's assembly hall, but Dharmaraja restrained me with a glance. O beautiful one! Knowing his intentions, I controlled myself. That we have been
dislodged from the kingdom, that I have not killed the Kurus, Suyodhana, Karna and Soubala Shakuni, that I have
not sliced off the evil Duhshasana's head-all of these burn me, like stakes impaled in my heart. O fortunate one!
Do not abandon dharma. O one with the beautiful hips! O immensely intelligent one! Conquer your anger. If King
Yudhishthira hears this censure from you, he is certain to give up his life. O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful
hips! O slender-waisted one! So will Dhananjaya and the twins. When they have gone to the other world, I will no
longer be capable of being alive. O beautiful one! Sukanya, the daughter of Sharyati, followed Bhargava Chya-
vana, who had become a termite hill, into the forest, so as to pacify him[The story has been recounted in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. You may have heard of the beauty of
Nadayani Indrasena. In earlier times, she followed her aged husband, though he was one thousand years old[Nadayani is also written as Narayani. The husband is Mudgala. The story has not been told completely, though
there is a reference in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. You
may have heard about Janaka's daughter, Vaidehi Sita. She followed her husband when he dwelt in the great
forest[This is a reference to the Ramayana. Janaka was the king of Videha.]. Rama's beloved queen was molested by a rakshasa. Though she went through many difficulties, the one
with the beautiful hips followed no one other than Rama. O timid one! Like that, Lopamudra possessed youth and
beauty. By renouncing all the objects of desire that can be obtained by men, she followed Agastya[The story has been recounted in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. O fortunate
one! Just as these beautiful ladies[Aryas.] became famous because of their devotion to their husbands, you will also triumph because of all your qualities. Wait for a little more time. Only a month and a half is left. When thirteen years
are completed, you will become a king's queen again."

'Droupadi replied, "O Bhima! I shed tears because I was suffering. I could not control my misery. I did not censure the king[Yudhishthira.]. O Bhimasena! O mighty-armed one! One need not dwell over what is past. The present is here and
it is time for you to act. O Bhima! Kaikeyi is anxious that I surpass her in beauty. She is constantly worried that the
king[Virata, Kaikeyi being Sudeshna.] might approach me. Knowing her intentions, the evil-minded Kichaka, knowing his own false intentions,
always propositions me. He has angered me. O Bhima! But I have repeatedly controlled my anger. I have told
Kichaka, who has lost control over his own soul because of lust, 'Protect yourself. I am the beloved wife and
queen of five gandharvas. Those brave and invincible ones, who act out of courage, will slay you.' On being thus
addressed, the evil-souled Kichaka replied, 'O Sairandhri! O one with the beautiful smiles! I am not frightened of
gandharvas. I will kill a hundred, and a hundred thousand, gandharvas who are assembled in battle. O timid one!
Give me a chance.' Thus addressed, I again spoke to the suta who was overtaken by lust. 'You do not have the
strength to counter the famous gandharvas. I am born in a noble lineage and am virtuous in conduct. I have always
been established in dharma. O Kichaka! I do not desire that anyone should be killed. That is the reason that you are
still alive.' Thus addressed, the evil-souled one burst out in loud laughter. He does not stay on the right path. Nor
does he follow dharma. The evil-souled one is evil in his sentiments and is overcome by lust and desire. The insolent and evil-souled one has been repulsed repeatedly. But whenever he sets sight on me, he molests me and I am
certain to give up my life. While all of you seek to observe dharma, a great dharma is being destroyed. The wife
must be protected at the appropriate time. If the wife is protected, the offspring are protected. If the offspring are
protected, one's own self is protected. I have heard brahmanas speak about the dharma of different varnas[Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras.]. There
is no dharma for kshatriyas other than the destruction of enemies. While Dharmaraja looked on, Kichaka kicked
me with his foot. O Bhimasena! O immensely strong one! It was in your sight too. It was you who protected me
from the terrible Jatasura and together with your brothers, also from Jayadratha[The Jatasura story has been recounted in Section 34 (Volume 3) and the Jayadratha story in Section 42 (Volume
Three).]. Kill the evil one who molests
me in this way. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because he is favoured by the king, he causes me grief. This
one is overtaken by lust. Destroy him like an earthen pot against stone. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is
responsible for many of my miseries. If the sun rises tomorrow morning and he is alive, I will drink poison, rather
than fall into Kichaka's clutches. O Bhimasena! It is better for me to die now, in front of you."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, she clung to Bhima's chest and started to weep. Having embraced her,
Bhima offered her great consolation. He thought of Kichaka in his mind and licked the corners of his mouth.'
