'Krishna said, "O great king! Because of all your qualities, you are capable of performing rajasuya. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Though you know everything, I shall tell you something. Those who are known as kshatriyas in this world are remnants from kshatriyas who were exterminated by Jamadagni Rama[Parashurama.]. O lord of the earth!
O bull among the Bharata lineage! You know about the rules and the authority of words those kshatriyas established to decide lineage. All the kings and all the hierarchies of kshatriyas on this earth claim descent from Aila[Pururava, the son of Ila and Budha, the first king of the lunar dynasty.]
and Ikshvaku[Son of Vaivasvata Manu and the first king of the solar dynasty.]. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Know that the kings from Aila's lineage and those
from Ikshvaku's lineage constitute one hundred and one dynasties. O great king! The descendants of Yayati and
Bhoja are also great in number and qualities and extend in the four directions. They and their prosperity are worshipped everywhere by the kshatriyas.

'"However, after having enjoyed the middle kingdom[The region around Mathura. Mathura was the land of the Yadavas and Jarasandha laid siege to it on eighteen
occasions.], a king named Chaturyu[Jarasandha. Since chatura means clever, Chaturyu may be a reference to Jarasandha's wiliness. Jarasandha
was the son of Brihadratha. He was born in two halves that were united by a she-demon named Jara. Thus, the
child came to be known as Jarasandha, the word sandhi meaning to join.], one of the one hundred and
one dynasties, wished to create dissension among them. Jarasandha has inherited the empire by birth and that
king's influence extends everywhere. O king! O great king! The powerful Shishupala has gone to him like a disciple and has become his general. Vakra, the immensely strong king of Karusha, who fights with the powers of
maya, and many other immensely valorous and great-souled ones, are also under his protection. The illustrious
Hamsa and Dibhaka are also with the immensely valorous Jarasandha. And there are Dantavakra, Karusha[Probably Vakra being repeated.], Kal-
abha and Meghavahana. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhagadatta was your father's old
friend. On his forehead he wears a divine gem that is known as the supreme gem on earth. He is the one who punished the two yavana[Greek. More correctly, Ionian.] kings Mura and Naraka and now, with unlimited powers like Varuna, is the king of the
west[This is odd. Elsewhere in the Mahabharata, Bhagadatta is said to rule in the east.]. Though he has lowered his head[To Jarasandha.] through his speech and especially his deeds, his heart actually holds
affection for you, like a father does. Your brave maternal uncle, Purujit, the extender of the Kuru lineage and the
scorcher of his enemies, rules in the south-west extremities of the earth and is the only king who is affectionately
loyal to you. Likewise, the evil king of the Chedis[Shishupala. This is repetition again, since Shishupala has been mentioned earlier.], whom I did not kill earlier, has also gone over to Jarasandha.
He is known in the world as the supreme being and out of delusion, always bears my signs[There was a Vasudeva of Pundra who was known as Vasudeva and also sported Krishna's signs. He is referred to a little later. In the text, Vasudeva of Pundra's crimes are ascribed incorrectly to Shishupala, though the
commonality is that both were Krishna's enemies.]. There is also a king
powerful in Vanga[The eastern part of Bengal.], Pundra and Kirata[Kiratas are mountainous tribes who lived through hunting.], known as Vasudeva of Pundra. O great king! There is also the powerful Bhishmaka Chaturyu[Jarasandha has been referred to as Chaturyu earlier. This is clearly a different Chaturyu.] of Bhoja, a friend of Indra's and a slayer of enemies. Through his learning and
strength, he has conquered Pandya[Kingdom in southern India, near today's Tirunelveli. It was near the mountain Malaya and the river
Tamraparni.] and Krathakaishika. The valorous Ahriti is his brother and is like Jamadagni
Rama in battle. They also serve the king of Magadha[Jarasandha was the king of Magadha. Magadha is the southern part of Bihar.]. We are his relatives[Because the Bhojas are a line of the Yadavas.] and always do what is agreeable to
him. But though we honour him, he doesn't honour us and always does what is disagreeable to us. O king! Without
bearing in mind his lineage and his strength, he has only seen Jarasandha's blazing fame and has placed himself
under him. O lord! Out of fear for Jarasandha, the eighteen branches of the northern Bhojas have fled to the west
and so have the Shurasenas, the Bhadrakaras, the Bodhas, the Shalvas, the Patachcharas, the Sustharas, the Sukuttas, the Kunindas and the Kuntis. The kings of the Shalveyas, together with their brothers and attendants, the
southern Panchalas and the eastern Koshalas from the Kunti region have also fled. Out of oppressive fear for
Jarasandha, the Matsyas and the Samnyastapadas have left the north in terror and fled to the south. All the Pancha-
las have abandoned their own kingdoms and fled in all directions.

'"Some time earlier, Kamsa[The king of Mathura and the son of Ugrasena. Devaki was Krishna's mother and Kamsa was her cousin.], mindless in folly, oppressed his relatives and married the two daughters of Brihadratha's son[That is, he married Jarasandha's daughters.], making them his queens. They are named Asti and Prapti and are Sahadeva's younger sisters.
Strengthened by this alliance, that foolish one oppressed his relatives and became superior to all of them, though
this brought him great ignominy. The evil-hearted one then oppressed the elders among the Bhoja kings and in a
desire to save their relatives, they concluded an alliance with us. I served my relatives by marrying off Ahuka's
daughter, Sutanu, to Akrura[Krishna's uncle.]. Then, with Samkarshana[Balarama.] acting as my second, I killed Kamsa and Sunama, with
Rama's[Balarama.] assistance. O king! Though that immediate danger was averted, Jarasandha rose up in arms against us.
The eighteen branches of the Yadavas consulted among themselves. Even if one killed with mighty weapons that
can kill a hundred at a time[The text uses the expression shatadha, which is a weapon that can kill a hundred at a time. More common is
the expression shataghni, which is also a weapon that can kill a hundred (shata) at a time.], one would not be able to kill him in three hundred years, because he had two
supreme warriors named Hamsa and Dibhaka[Also known as Dimbhaka.]. They were the strongest of the strong, with power like that of the
immortals. When the valorous Jarasandha was united with these two brave warriors, there was no one in the three
worlds who could vanquish them. Such was my view. O supremely wise among wise ones! This was not only my
view. It was the view of all the kings who exist. O king! The great king famous as Hamsa was engaged in battle for
eighteen days. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A rumour spread that Hamsa had been killed. On hearing that
Hamsa had been killed, Dibhaka decided that he could not continue to live in this world without Hamsa. He
drowned himself in the Yamuna and, in this way, met his death. When Hamsa, the vanquisher of enemy cities,
heard the news about Dibhaka, he too immersed himself in the Yamuna and drowned. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! When King Jarasandha heard about their deaths in the water, he left Shurasena[Name for Mathura.] and returned to his own
city.

'"When that enemy-killing king retreated, we were delighted and began to live happily in Mathura again. But
the lotus-eyed wife of Kamsa, Jarasandha's daughter, went to her father, the king of Magadha. O lord of kings! O
destroyer of enemies! She repeatedly urged him to kill her husband's killer. O great king! We remembered the advice we had given ourselves at the earlier council. O lord of men! Distracted at heart, we fled. O king! We divided
our great riches into small portions and out of fear for him, fled separately, with our riches, kin and relatives. After
thinking about this, we sought refuge in the western directions. O king! There is a beautiful city known as
Kushasthali[Dvaravati.], adorned by Mount Raivata[Also known as Raivataka.]. We began to live there. We repaired its fortifications so that it became impregnable even to the gods. It was not just the bulls among the Vrishnis, even the women were capable of
fighting from there. O killer of enemies! Without any fear, we now live there. O tiger among the Kuru lineage!
When we look at the entry to that mountain, known as Madhavitirtha, we Madhavas have found supreme happiness[The Yadavas are descended from Madhu and are known as Madhavas. Madhavitirtha is the same as Raivata
and probably means the tirtha of the Madhavas, though Madhavatirtha would have been more appropriate.].

'"With our strength, we were capable of withstanding Jarasandha's oppression. But we have resolved to seek
refuge with you. Our habitation is three yojanas deep and extends for three yojanas. At intervals of one yojana,
there are one hundred gates and the portals are guarded by brave and valorous kshatriyas from the eighteen branches[The eighteen branches of the Yadavas.]. There are eighteen thousand warriors in our lineage. Ahuka has one hundred sons and each of them has three
hundred more. Charudeshna and his brother[Meaning Pradyumna, the son of Krishna and Rukmini.], Chakradeva, Satyaki, I myself, Rohini's son[Balarama or Baladeva.], Samba who matches Shouri[Shouri is a name for both Krishna and Balarama. But since Krishna is doing the speaking here, the Shouri in
question is Balarama.] in battle-these are the seven atirathas[An atiratha is a warrior on a chariot who is unrivalled in battle.]. O king! Now listen to the others-Kritavarma, Anadhrishti,
Samika, Samitinjaya, Kahva, Shanku and Nidanta, these seven are maharathas. The old king Andhakabhoja and
his two sons make ten[There are thus ten maharathas.]. They are brave, capable of destroying the worlds, valorous and endowed with immense
strength. They have now remembered the middle country[The middle country is the region around Mathura.] and live there, among the Vrishnis. O supreme among
the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You alone possess the qualities of becoming a universal
emperor. You are capable of becoming the sovereign of the kshatriyas. O king! But in my view, you are incapable
of performing the rajasuya as long as the immensely powerful Jarasandha is alive. He has conquered and imprisoned all the kings in Girivraja[Jarasandha's capital in Magadha.], the way a lion imprisons giant elephants in a cavern in that king of mountains[Meaning the Himalayas.].
That king Jarasandha wishes to sacrifice the lords of the earth. It was after worshipping Mahadeva that he defeated
the kings on the field of battle. After having defeated the vanquished kings and their followers, he took them in fetters to his city and built a prison for men. O great king! Out of fear for Jarasandha, we too have had to abandon
Mathura and have fled to the city of Dvaravati. O great king! If you wish to perform the sacrifice, seek to set them
free and kill Jarasandha. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Without this, your sacrifice cannot commence. O
supreme among those who are wise! This alone can lead to rajasuya. O king! O unblemished one! This is my view.
Do you think otherwise? After reflecting on everything yourself and on cause and effect, tell us what is appropriate."'
