Krishna said, "I bowed my head down before that great mass of energy. Filled with great delight, I told the illustrious one, 'Firmness in dharma, the ability to destroy enemies in battle, fame, ferocity, supreme strength,
devotion to yoga, your proximity and hundreds and hundreds of sons-these are the boons I seek.' On hearing my
words, Shankara agreed that it would be this way. Thereafter, the mother of the universe, the one who holds up
everything, the one who cleanses everything, the store of austerities, Sharvani Uma, spoke to me. 'O unblemished
one! The illustrious one has granted you a son named Samba. Ask for eight boons from me too and I will grant
them to you.' O descendant of the Pandu lineage! Addressed thus, I bowed my head down before her and said,
'Lack of anger towards brahmanas, the favours of my father, hundreds of sons, supreme objects of pleasure, affection towards my family, the favours of my mother, the attainment of tranquility and skill-these are the boons I
seek.' The goddess replied, 'It shall be that way. You will possess the power of an immortal. I never speak anything that is false. You will have sixteen thousand wives. Your love for them, and their love for you, will never decay. You will obtain great affection from your relatives. I also grant you a handsome body. Seven thousand guests
will always feed in your house.'"

'Vasudeva continued, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The god and the goddess granted me these boons.
O  Bhima's  elder  brother!  Then,  with  those  companions[Ganas.],  they  instantly  disappeared.  O  supreme  among  the
Kourava lineage! I recounted all these wonderful incidents to Upamanyu, the extremely energetic brahmana. The
one who was excellent in his vows bowed down before the god of the gods and said, 'There is no one who is Shar-
va's equal in giving. There is no one who is Sharva's equal in battle. There is no god who is Sharva's equal. There
is no refuge that is equal to Sharva. O son! In krita yuga, there was a famous rishi named Tandi. For ten thousand
years, he meditated on that god. He worshipped him with devotion. Listen to what he obtained as a consequence.
Having satisfied Mahadeva with his praises, he saw the lord. He said, "You are the most sacred of the sacred. You
are the supreme destination among all destinations. You are the fiercest energy among all kinds of energy. You are
the supreme austerity among all austerities. You are the wealth of the universe. You are the golden-eyed one. You
are the one who is invoked by many. I bow down before you. O lord! You are the one who grants a lot of fortune.
You are the supreme truth. I bow down before you. O lord! You are the one whom ascetics, scared of birth and
death, strive to obtain. You are the one who grants emancipation. You are the one with the one thousand rays. I
bow down before you. You are the abode of bliss. Brahma, Shatakratu, Vishnu, the Vishvadevas and the maharshis
are incapable of comprehending your truth. How can those like us comprehend you? You are the one who gets
time going. You are the one into whom time merges. You are spoken of as Kala[Time.]. You are spoken of as Purusha.
You are also spoken of as Brahma. The celestial rishis who know about the Puranas speak of you as possessing
three forms[Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra.]. You are Adhipourusha, Adhyatma, Adhibhuta, Adhidaiva, Adhiloka, Adhivijnana and Adhiyajna[Adhipourusha is the supreme spirit, adhyatma is the atman inside the body, adhibhuta represents the gross or
material elements, adhidaiva is the divine element operating in material objects, adhiloka is the principle in the
various worlds, adhivijnana is the highest plane of consciousness or knowledge and adhiyajna exists in
sacrifices.].
Even the gods find it difficult to know you. But when learned people know you in the body, they are emancipated
and obtain the supreme state of welfare. O lord! Those who do not wish to know you, undergo many births and
deaths. You are the gate to heaven and emancipation. You grant and you take away. You are emancipation and
heaven. You are desire and anger. You are sattva, rajas and tamas. You are the lower regions. You are the upper regions. You are Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Skanda, Indra, Savitri, Yama, Varuna, the moon, Dhatri, Vidhatri and the
lord of riches[Kubera.]. You are earth, wind, water, fire, water, speech, intelligence, understanding and mind. You  are
deeds. You are both truth and falsehood. You are the existent. You are the non-existent. You are the senses. You are
the objects of the senses. You are beyond Prakriti. You are permanent. You are superior to the universe and superior to everything that exists in the universe. You can be thought of. You cannot be thought of. You are the supreme
brahman. You  are  the  supreme  destination.  There  is  no  doubt  that  you  are  the  objective  of  those  who  follow
sankhya and yoga. There is no doubt that I have become successful today[By obtaining your sight.]. There is no doubt that I have obtained
the destination of the virtuous. This is the destination obtained on earth by those whose knowledge and intelligence
are unblemished. Alas! I was foolish. For a long period of time, I did not possess the consciousness. I did not know
the supreme god, the eternal one who is known by the learned. It is through the devotion of many births that the
god has shown me his favours and I have been able to directly see him. Knowing you is like obtaining amrita. You
are the eternal mystery to gods, asuras and men. He is the illustrious god who does everything. His face is in every
direction. He is inside all atmans. He sees everything and goes everywhere. He knows everything. He creates life
and is the one who upholds life. He is the creator of beings and is the destination of all creatures. He is embodied
and is the refuge of all those who are embodied. He is the one who enjoys a body. He is the destination of all those
with bodies. He is adhyatma, the destination of all those who are virtuous, those who meditate and know about the
atman. He is also the lord who is the immortal objective. He is the one who grants good and bad ends to all creatures. He is the one who ordains birth and death for all creatures. He is the lord who grants success to the rishis
who desire success. He is the lord who grants emancipation to the brahmanas who desire emancipation. Beginning
with the earth, he is the creator of all the worlds, including the residents of heaven. He maintains the gods and
grants them welfare in his eight forms[Shiva's eight forms are as Bhava in water, Rudra in fire, Pashupati in officiating priests, Ishana in the sun, Mahadeva in the moon, Bhima in space, Sharva in the earth and Ugra in the wind.]. Everything flows from him and he is established in everything. It is into
him that everything is destroyed. He  is  alone  the  one  who  is  eternal.  He  is  the  world  of  truth,  desired  by  the
supremely righteous ones who desire truth. He is the emancipation and freedom from hardships, sought by those
who know about the atman. He is the lord whom Brahma and the Siddhas have kept secret and do not reveal to
gods, asuras and humans[This probably means secret references in sacred texts.]. That is the reason that gods, asuras and men do not know about Bhava. Though he resides in their hearts, they are confused. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He resides in all atmans and shows
himself to those who resort to the yoga of devotion. Knowing him, one is not born and does not have to face death.
If one knows that supreme one, there is nothing else that remains to be known. Having obtained that supreme gain,
there is nothing else that remains to be obtained. By obtaining that supreme and subtle being, one obtains a state
that is without decay. There are those who know the truth about the qualities of sankhya, they are accomplished in
the sacred texts of sankhya. Having got to know about that supreme knowledge, they are freed from bonds. He is
the one known by those who are learned in the Vedas. He is the one who is established in Vedanta. Those who are
devoted to pranayama and immerse themselves in it, meditate on him. He is devayana and is said to the gate to the
sun. He is pitriyana and is said to be the gate to the moon[Devayana is the path of the gods and leads to the sun. Pitriyana is the path of the ancestors and leads to the
moon.]. He is the colourful progress of time, the years and the
yugas. He is existence and non-existence. He is uttarayana and dakshinayana[Respectively, the sun's progress to the north of the equator and the sun's progress to the south of the equator.]. Earlier, Prajapati praised him in
many chants. He accepted you as a son, under the name of Nilalohita. In their rites, officiating priests praise you
with many hymns from the Rig Veda. Officiating priests know you in three different ways[These three different ways are interpreted as the shruti texts, the smriti texts and meditation.] and offer oblations
with hymns from the Yajur Veda. Those who are pure in their intelligence and know about the Sama Veda chant
Sama hymns to you. You are the supreme origin of sacrifices. You are said to be the supreme lord. Night and day
are his hearing and sight. Fortnights and months are his heads and arms. The seasons are his energy. Austerities are
his patience. The year constitutes his anus, thighs and feet. He is Mrityu and Yama. He is the fire of destruction. He
is time. He is the force of destruction. He is the supreme origin of time. He is eternal time. He is the moon, the sun,
the nakshatras, the planets, the winds, Dhruva, the saptarshis and the seven worlds[Bhurloka, kharloka, svarloka, maharloka, janarloka, taparloka and satyaloka (brahmaloka).]. He is Pradhana and Mahat.
He is not manifest. He is the specific destination of all deeds. He is all creatures, beginning with Brahma and ending with the lowest. He is the eight Prakritis[Earth, air, space, fire, water, mind, intelligence and ego.]. He is beyond Prakriti. He is the state of lack of anxiety. He is the
eternal brahman. He is the supreme objective that those who know about the sacred texts and Vedangas meditate
on. He is the supreme kashtha. He is the supreme kala. He is supreme success. He is the supreme objective. He is
supreme tranquility. He is supreme detachment. Having obtained him, learned ones think that they have obtained
everything. He is contentment. He is success. He is said to be shruti and smriti. He is the objective of adhyatma,
sought by the faithful. Learned ones obtain the one who is without decay. Those who desire to perform sacrifices,
with a great deal of donations given away, seek him. He is the destination of the divine gods. He is the eternal destination. There are those who meditate, offer oblations and observe vows, subjecting their bodies to hardships and
rituals. Their torments are with that god as an objective. Bhava is the objective. There are those who are detached
and cast aside all rites. They desire Brahma's world, but you are actually that eternal objective. There are others
who seek to overcome death and abandon all detachment, seeking an end to transformations and destructions. He
is that eternal end too. He is the refuge of jnana and vijnana. He is said to be without form and without blemish.
That god is the objective of emancipation. Bhava is the supreme goal. He has been spoken about in the Vedas, the
sacred texts and the Puranas. He has been spoken of as the end after death. It is through the favours of the lord that
one obtains, or does not obtain." Thus did Tandi satisfy the undecaying Ishana through his austerities and yoga. He
spoke these words, which Brahma, the creator of the worlds, had said in ancient times. "Brahma, Shatakratu, Vishnu, the Vishvadevas and the maharshis are incapable of knowing him." Shiva was pleased at this and replied, "You
will be without destruction and without transformation. You will be free from all misery. You will be famous and
full of energy. You will possess divine knowledge. The rishis will come to you. Your son will be the composer of
sutras[A sutra is an aphorism and also a collection of such aphorisms.]. O best among brahmanas! There is no doubt that this will happen through my favours. What will I give
you  or  someone else? What do  you  desire? Tell me what you  wish  for." Joining his hands  in salutation, he[Tandi.]
replied, "Let my devotion towards you be firm." The god granted this boon. Praised and worshipped by the gods,
the rishis and the residents of heaven, he then disappeared. O lord of the Yadavas! With her companions, the goddess also disappeared. The rishi came to my hermitage and told me everything that had happened. O best among
men! For my success, Tandi recounted to me all those famous names[Mahadeva's names.]. Listen to those. The grandfather knew ten
thousand names. The sacred texts have one thousand of Sharva's names. O Achyuta! Tandi mentioned some names
of the illustrious one, but those are secret. Through the favours of the god[Shiva.], in ancient times, the great-souled lord
of the gods[Brahma.] uttered those names.'"'
