Janaka asked, 'O maharshi! How were the different complexions generated among the varnas? O supreme
among eloquent ones! I wish to hear about this. Tell me. The sacred texts say that one's offspring are nothing
but one's own self. In particular, having been generated from brahmanas, how has there been decay?'

'"Parashara replied, 'O great king! It is indeed that way. The offspring are generated from one's own self. But
because of the deviation from austerities, this decay into jatis has set in[The text uses the word jati or class, not the same as varna.]. When the field is good and the seed is
good, an auspicious crop results. However, if these are inferior, an inferior crop results. Those who are learned
about dharma know that when Prajapati created the worlds, some were created from his mouth, some from his
arms, some from his thighs and some from his feet. O son! The brahmanas were born from the mouth and the
kshatriyas and their relatives from the arms. O king! The rich ones[The vaishyas.] were born from the thighs. The attendants[The shudras.]
were born from the feet. O bull among men! These were the only four varnas that were created. The sacred texts
say that all the others that were created, over and above these, were the result of a mixture. Among those that resulted  from  the  kshatriya  jati  were  Atirathas,  Ambashthas,  Ugras,  Vaidehakas,  Shvapakas,  Pulkasas,  Stenas,
Nishadas, Sutas and Magadhas. O lord of men! The Ayogas, Karanas, Vratyas and Chandalas were born from an
intermingling between the four varnas.'

'"Janaka asked, 'How did brahmanas with different gotras[Subdivisions.] result? O supreme among sages! There are many
gotras in the world. How can those born from different wombs, those born from shudra wombs and those born
from inferior wombs become sages?'

'"Parashara replied, 'O king! Though these are not brahmanas by virtue of their inferior birth, these great-souled
ones can resort to austerities and cleanse their souls. O king! Here and there, the sages had sons. However, because
of their[The offspring.] own austerities, they again succeeded in becoming rishis. O king! O ruler of Videha! Earlier, my grandfather[Parashara's grandfather was Vasishtha.], Rishyashringa, Kashyapa, Vata, Tandya, Kripa, Kakshivat, Kamatha and the others, Yavakrita, Drona,
supreme among eloquent ones, Ayu, Matanga, Datta, Drupada and Matsya obtained their own natural states by resorting to austerities. They were knowledgable about the Vedas and were established in self-control and austerities.
O king! Initially, only four gotras were born-Angiras, Kashyapa, Vasishtha and Bhrigu. O king! But because of
their deeds, other gotras were generated. Their names resulted from the austerities that those virtuous ones resorted
to.'

'"Janaka asked, 'O illustrious one! Tell me about the specific dharma of different varnas. What is the general
template of dharma that leads to welfare everywhere?'

'"Parashara replied, 'O king! Receiving gifts, officiating at sacrifices and studying represent the specific dharma
for brahmanas. Kshatriyas are radiant when they protect. The vaishyas must engage in agriculture, animal husbandry and trade. O lord of men! The task of shudras is to serve the other three varnas[The word used is dvija. Here it clearly means the other three varnas, not brahmanas alone.]. O king! I have described
to you the specific dharma of the varnas. O son! Now listen to the details about general dharma. O king! Non-violence, lack of injury, lack of distraction, giving proper shares, performing funeral rites, attending to guests, truthfulness, lack of anger, contentment with one's own wife, purity, constant lack of malice, knowledge of the atman
and endurance-these represent general dharma. Brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas are the three varnas that are
dvijas[They are born twice, the sacred thread ceremony representing the second birth.]. O supreme among bipeds! These are the ones who have rights to such dharma. O king! If these three varnas resort to perverse deeds, then that leads to their downfall. They are elevated if they stick to their own deeds,
just as the righteous ones do. No downfall has been determined for a shudra, nor is there any means of his cleansing himself from such a downfall. He cannot follow the conduct of dharma laid down in the sacred texts. However,
he should not act against such dharma. O ruler of Videha! O great king! Learned ones say that shudras are like
brahmanas. O Indra among men! I see such a person as the god Vishnu, the foremost one in the universe[This is cryptic and requires interpretation. Brahma is equated with brahmanas and Vishnu with kshatriyas. The
preceding sentence seems to say that shudras can become brahmanas in their next lives. But Parashara thinks
that they can only become kshatriyas in their next lives.]. Even
an inferior person can desire to uplift himself by resorting to the conduct of the virtuous. They are not censured if
they perform any of the rites that lead to nourishment. But they must avoid mantras. Whenever inferior people resort to the conduct of the virtuous, they obtain happiness, both in this world and in the hereafter.'

'"Janaka asked, 'O great sage! What taints a person? Is it his deeds or his jati? A doubt has arisen in my mind.
You should explain this to me.'

'"Parashara replied, 'O great king! There is no doubt that both can give rise to taints. But listen specifically to
how both deeds and jati can be countered. Regardless of birth and deeds[Presumably deeds in earlier lives.], a person may perform wicked acts.
However, even if the birth is tainted, if a person does not act wickedly, he is truly a man. If a man of superior birth
performs wicked deeds, he is censured. Those acts taint him. Therefore, such deeds are not appropriate.'

'"Janaka asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! In this world, which are the acts of dharma? Which are the acts
that never lead to injury to beings?'

'"Parashara replied, 'O great king! Listen to what you have asked me. These are acts of non-injury that always
save a man. Those who renounce and worship the fire can see that their anxiety is dispelled. They are the ones who
resort to the beneficial path of dharma and ascend progressively. They are devoted and humble. They are always
self-controlled and restrained. They abandon all kinds of action and go to the spot that is without decay. O king!
All the varnas should perform the deeds of dharma properly and speak truthful words. In the world of the living,
they must give up terrible adharma. They will go to heaven. There is no need to reflect on this.'"'
