'Dhritarashtra said, "We have never heard false words from him[Yudhishthira.]. He has Dhananjaya as his warrior and can rule
over the three worlds. Even though I think about it continually, I do not see any charioteer who can counter the
wielder of the Gandiva in battle. He will shoot shafted and hollow arrows that will traverse their paths and penetrate the heart. There is no one who can counter the wielder of the Gandiva in battle. Drona and Karna are brave
bulls among men. They may be able to withstand him because of their greatness. But there is no doubt that I will
not have victory in this world. Karna is compassionate, but he is rash. The preceptor is senior and aged. The powerful Partha wields a firm bow and has conquered all exhaustion. He is capable of countering them and there will
be a terrible battle, with both sides undefeated. All of them are warriors who are knowledgeable about weapons
and all of them have attained great fame. They may possess the riches of all the gods, but they will not obtain victory. There can certainly be peace if both of them[Drona and Karna.] are killed, or if Phalguna is. But Arjuna's defeat will not happen. Nor is there anyone who can kill him. How can his rage, which has arisen against the wicked ones, be pacified? There are others who know about weapons. They conquer and are conquered. But it has been heard that Phal-
guna only has victory as the outcome. He challenged the thirty-three gods and satisfied Agni in Khandava. He defeated all the gods. I know of no instance of his defeat. His charioteer is Hrishikesha, who is his equal in character
and conduct. O son[The word used is tata.]! His victory is certain, just as Indra's victory is. We have heard that three forces have come
together on a single chariot now, the two Krishnas[Krishna is one of Arjuna's names too.] and the stringed Gandiva bow. There is no bow like that, nor a
warrior, or a charioteer. But the wicked ones who follow Duryodhana do not know this. O Sanjaya! O son[The word used is tata.]! When
the blazing thunderbolt descends on the head, it may leave a residue, but the arrows released by Kiriti leave no
remnant. I can already see Phalguna blazing forth. He severs the heads from the trunks with his shower of arrows.
The energy of his arrows radiates in all the directions. Ignited by Gandiva, they burn down the armies of my sons.
They are terrified at the roar of Savyasachi's chariot. I can see the large army of the Bharatas tremble and flee. Like
a large fire burns down deadwood and grows and spreads everywhere, with large flames fanned by the wind, he
will consume those who are mine. In battle, the assassin Kiriti will release a large number of sharp arrows. He will
be like death, who robs everything, and has been ordained by the creator to slaughter everything. I see and hear of
many kinds of omens in the abode of the Kurus and around them, before the start of the war. Destruction certainly
confronts the Bharatas."'
