'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Kshemadhurti used his arrows to pierce Brihatkshatra of the Kekayas, firm in his valour, in the chest. King Brihatkshatra wished to penetrate Drona's array and swiftly struck him in that battle with
ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Kshemadhurti became angry. He used a yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow
to sever the bow of the great-souled Kekaya. Having severed his bow, he then used an arrow with drooping tufts to
quickly pierce that supreme of archers in the chest. Brihatkshatra laughed and took up another bow. He deprived
maharatha Kshemadhurti of his horses, charioteer and standard. He then used another yellow, sharp and broad-
headed arrow to sever the king's head, with its blazing earrings, from the body[There is an inconsistency, because Kshemadhurti was later killed by Bhima.]. That head, with its curly hair
and crown, was suddenly lopped off and fell down on the ground, as resplendent as a stellar body dislodged from
the sky. On seeing that he had been slain in the battle, maharatha Brihatkshatra was delighted. For the sake of the
Parthas, he descended powerfully on your soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The great archer Viradhanva countered the powerful Dhrishtaketu, who was advancing against Drona. Those two spirited ones clashed
against each other and seemed to possess arrows as their teeth. Wishing to kill each other, they struck each other
with many thousand arrows. Those two tigers among men fought with each other, like two leaders of elephant
herds, fierce and crazy, fighting with each other in a great forest. They were like angry tigers in a mountainous cavern. Wishing to kill each other, those immensely valorous ones fought. O lord of the earth! The battle was tumultuous and worth watching. Masses of siddhas and charanas witnessed the extraordinary wonder. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The angry Viradhanva laughed and used a broad-headed arrow to sever Dhrishtaketu's bow
into two. The maharatha king of Chedi discarded the severed bow. He grasped a large iron spear that possessed a
golden handle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The immensely valorous one suddenly hurled this towards Viradhanva's chariot. That spear was one that could kill heroes. Struck by it, he was severely hurt and with his heart
shattered powerfully, fell down from the chariot onto the ground. O lord! When the brave maharatha from Trigarta
was killed, the Pandaveyas shattered your army from every direction.

'"Durmukha shot sixty arrows at Sahadeva. He roared loudly with that great roar, challenged Pandava to do battle. Madri's son became angry and laughingly, pierced Durmukha with ten arrows. Brother fought against brother.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the immensely strong Sahadeva was fighting violently in the
batte, Durmukha struck him with nine arrows. However, the immensely strong one[Sahadeva.] used a broad-headed arrow
to sever Durmukha's standard and then used four sharp arrows to slay his four horses. He then used another yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever his charioteer's head, with blazing earrings, from his body. He used a
sharp kshurapra arrow to slice down Kouravya's giant bow. Having severed it in the battle, Sahadeva then pierced
him with five arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! With his horses slain, Durmukha was distressed. He abandoned his chariot and climbed onto Niramitra's chariot. In that great battle, in the midst of those
soldiers, Sahadeva, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used a broad-headed arrow to angrily slay Niramitra. Niramitra,
the lord of men and the son of the king of Trigarta, fell down from the seat of his chariot and this caused sorrow to
your forces. Having killed him, mighty-armed Sahadeva roamed around, like Rama, Dasharatha's son, after having
killed the immensely strong Khara[This is a reference to the Ramayana. Rama killed Khara, Ravana's younger brother.]. O lord of men! On seeing that the immensely strong Prince Niramitra had
been slain, great sounds of lamentation arose among the Trigartas.

'"O king! In that battle, in an instant, Nakula vanquished Vikarna, your son with the large eyes. It was extraordinary. Vyaghradatta struck Satyaki with arrows that had drooping tufts. In the midst of the soldiers, he rendered him, his horses, his charioteer and his standard invisible. But Shini's brave descendant showed the dexterity
of his hands and countered those arrows. He used his arrows to bring down Vyaghradatta, his horses, his charioteer
and his standard. O lord! On seeing that the prince, the son of Magadha, had been killed, all the Magadhas made
efforts and attacked Yuyudhana from every direction. They released thousands of arrows and javelins, catapults,
spikes, clubs and maces. In the encounter, the brave ones fought with Satvata, who was invincible in battle. Satya-
ki, powerful and invincible in battle, laughed and without any difficulty, repulsed all of them. The bull among men
vanquished them. On seeing that the Magadhas had been routed, the few that were left ran away in every direction.
O lord! Your army was afflicted with Yuyudhana's arrows. The supreme of the Madhava lineage destroyed your
soldiers in that battle. The greatly illustrious one, supreme among archers, brandished his bow and was resplendent. O king! The army was shattered by the great-souled Satvata. Terrified of the long-armed one, no one advanced against him in that battle. Drona became extremely angry and rolled his eyes in anger. He himself advanced against Satyaki, whose deeds were based on truth."'
