The brahmanas said, "Let rites be performed for the great-souled Tryambaka. O king! When these rites have
been performed, we will endeavour to accomplish your objective."'

Vaishampayana  said,  'Hearing  the  words  of  the  brahmanas,  as  is  proper,  Yudhishthira  performed  rites  for
Girisha. Following the ordinances, the priest offered cleansed clarified butter and charu sanctified with mantras as
libations to the fire. O lord of men! Cheerfully, he accepted sweetmeats, payasam, meat and other offerings sanctified by mantras and offered them to the powerful one. He was accomplished in the Vedas and happy in his mind.
He offered all kinds of colourful garlands and cleansed and parched rice, as has been recommended. After that, he
rendered offerings to the servants of that extremely powerful one. Offerings were also rendered to Kubera, Indra
among the yakshas, Manibhadra and all the other yakshas who were the lords of the bhutas. O king! There was
krisara mixed with meat and other oblations mixed with sesamum[Krisara is made out of wheat flour, rice and sesamum.]. That spot of the god of the gods was beautiful. Worship was performed for all of Rudra's ganas. Placing Vyasa at the forefront, the king advanced towards the
store of riches. He worshipped the lord of riches and bowed his head down before him. With a cheerful mind,
colourful vessels full of krisara were offered to him[To Kubera.]. Worship was rendered to Shankha and Nidhi and all the
guardians of riches by the valiant one[Yudhishthira. Nidhi is a treasure that belongs to Kubera and there are nine of these. One of these is shankha.
Each of these nidhis has a guardian.] and also to the foremost of brahmanas. Strengthened by their auspicious
benedictions and full of energy, the best among the Kuru lineage happily began to dig for the riches. Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira dug out many thousands of colourful and beautiful vessels made out of iron-utensils, jugs, pitchers,
pans, pots and jars. These were then placed in giant chests with lids. O king! The king had three hundred thousand
of these vessels placed at either end of a pole. O lord of the earth! Arrangements were made for the wealth of Pandu's son to be borne. There were sixty thousand camels and one hundred and twenty thousand horses. O  great
king! There were one hundred thousand excellent elephants. There were similar numbers of carts, chariots and she-
elephants. There was no count of the number of mules and men. That was the amount of riches that Yudhishthira
caused to be dug up. Each load amounted to twenty four thousand coins, sixteen thousand plus eight thousand[We have added the word coins. It is left implicit in the text.].
Collecting all this wealth, Pandava again worshipped Mahadeva and set out for the city of Nagasahvya. With Dvaipayana's permission, he placed the priest at the forefront. The bull among men marched a distance of a govyuti
every day, setting up camp accordingly[Govyuti is a measure of distance. Literally, it is the distance from which a cow's bellow can be heard. A govyuti
is thus roughly equal to four miles.]. With that large army, the king advanced towards the city. They suffered
because of the burden of the riches. However, the extenders of the Kuru lineage were delighted.'
