Yudhishthira asked, "What is best for a man? What should he do to obtain happiness? How can he be cleansed
of his sins? How can he destroy his sins?"

'Bhishma replied, "This is the lineage of the gods and this is the revered lineage of the rishis. O son! If one
reads this during the two sandhyas, this is a supreme method to destroy all sins. The god who is the preceptor of
the gods and the asuras, the one to whom all creatures bow down, the inconceivable one, the one who cannot be
described, the life of all beings, the one who has not been born, the grandfather, the protector of the universe; Savitri, Brahma's faithful wife; the origin of the Vedas, the creator Vishnu, the lord Narayana; Virupaksha, Uma's consort; Skanda, the general; Vishakha, the devourer of oblations[Vishakha is being used as a name for Agni, since Agni is the divinity associated with the nakshatra Vishakha.]; Vayu; the radiant Chandra and Aditya; Shakra,
the  god  who  is  Shachi's  consort;  Yama,  with  Dhumorni[Dhumorni is being used in the sense of Yama's consort.];  Varuna,  with  Gouri[Gouri being used as Varuna's consort.];  the  lord  of  riches,  with
Riddhi[The lord of riches is Kubera and Riddhi is his wife.]; the amiable cow, the goddess, Surabhi; the great rishi, Vishrava; the six seasons; the ocean; Ganga; other rivers; the diverse Maruts; the Valakhilyas, accomplished in austerities; Krishna Dvaipayana; Narada, Parvata;
Vishvavasu,  Haha,  Huhu,  Tumbaru,  Chitrasena,  the  famous  messengers  of  the  gods;  the  immensely  fortunate
daughters of the gods; the large number of divine apsaras; Urvashi; Menaka; Rambha; Mishrakeshi; Alambusha;
Vishvachi;  Ghritachi;  Panchachuda;  Tilottama;  the  Adityas;  the  Vasus;  the  Rudras;  the  Ashvins;  the  ancestors;
dharma; truth; austerities; initiation; resolution; the grandfather; night; day; Kashyapa, Marichi's son; Shukra; Brihaspati; Bhouma[Bhouma is being used in the sense of Mars.]; Budha; Rahu; Shanaishchara[Shani, Saturn.]; the nakshatras; seasons; months; sandhyas; years; Vinata's
son[Garuda.];  the  oceans;  Kadru's  sons,  the  serpents;  Shatadru;  Vipasha;  Chandrabhaga;  Sarasvati;  Sindhu;  Devika;
Pushkara tirtha; Ganga; Mahanadi; Kapila; Narmada; Kampuna; Vishalya; Karatoya; Ambuvahini; Sarayu; Ganda-
ki; the great river, Lohitya; Tamra; Aruna; Vetravati; Parnasha; Goutami; Godavari; Venna; Krishnavenna; Adrija;
Dhrishadvati; Kaveri; Vamkshu; Mandakini; Prayaga; Prabhasa; the sacred Naimisha; Vishveshvara's place, where
the water in the lake is clear[This probably means Kailasa.]; the famous and sacred tirtha of Kurukshetra, with many water bodies; the supreme
Sindhu; austerities; gifts; Jambumarga; Hiranvati; Vitasta; the river Vekshumati; sacred parts of the earth, like Gangadvara; Rishikulya; Medhya; the river Chitrapatha; Koushiki; Yamuna; Sita; the river Charmanvati; the river Bhi-
marathi; the great river Bahuda; Mahendravani; Tridiva; Nilika; Sarasvati; Nanda; Aparananda; the tirtha of the
great lake; Gaya; Phalgu-tirtha; Dharmaranya, surrounded by the gods; the sacred lake and river created by Brahma, auspicious and pure, capable of destroying all sins and famous in the three worlds; Mount Himalayas, full of
divine herbs; Vindhyas, covered with many kinds of minerals, tirthas and herbs; Mount Meru; Malaya; Shveta,
decorated  with  silver;  Shringavat;  Mandara;  Nila;  Nishadha;  Dardura;  Chitrakuta;  Anjanabha;  Mount  Gandhamadana; the sacred Somagiri and many other large mountains; the directions; the sub-directions; the earth; all
the large trees; the Vishvadevas; the firmament; the nakshatras; and the planets. Let the gods I have named, and
those I have not named, always save us. A man who recites this is freed from all sins. A man who cheerfully
chants this is freed from all fear. A man who, without criticizing, chants this praise is free from all sins associated
with a mixture of the varnas. After the gods, I will recite the names of the brahmanas, stores of austerities, who
have obtained success through austerities. The recital of their names frees from all sins-Yavakrita; Raibhya; Kakshivat; Oushija; Bhrigu; Angiras; Kanva; the lord Medhatithi; and Barhi, the possessor of qualities. All of these are
based in the eastern direction. In the southern direction there are the immensely fortunate Ulmuchu; Pramuchu; the
immensely  fortunate  Mumuchu;  the  valiant  Svastyatreya;  the  powerful  Agastya,  the  son  of  Mitra-Varuna;  and
Dridhayu and Urdhvabahu, the two famous and excellent rishis. Listen to the names of those who are in the western direction-Ushadgu; his valiant brother, Parivyadha; the rishi Dirghatama; Goutama; Kashyapa; the maharshis
Ekata, Dvita and Trita; Atri's great-souled son; and the lord Sarasvata. Now hear about the ones who worship in
the  northern  direction-Atri;  Vasishtha;  Shakti;  Parashara's  valiant  son;  Vishvamitra;  Bharadvaja;  Jamadagni;
Richika's grandson, Rama; the rishi who is Uddaloka's son; Shvetaketu; Kohala; Vipula; Devala; Devasharma;
Dhoumya; Hastikashyapa; Lomasha; Nachiketa; Lomaharshana; the rishi Ugrashrava; and Bhargava, Chyavana.
These are enumerated as the names of the rishis who are revered by the gods. O king! If their names are recited
first,  one is freed from all sins. There  are  many  rajarshis  who  are  named-Nriga;  Yayati;  Nahusha;  Yadu;  the
valiant Puru; Dhundhumara; Dilipa; the valiant Sagara; Krishashva; Yuvanashva; Chitrashva; Satyavat; Dushyanta;
Bharata, the immensely famous emperor; Yavana; Janaka; King Dridaratha; Raghu, supreme among men; King
Dasharatha; Rama, the destroyer of rakshasas; the brave Shashabindu; Bhagiratha; Harishchandra; Marutta; Jahnu,
who was served by Jahnavi; Mahodaya; Alarka; King Aila; Karandhama, best among men; King Kadhmara; Dak-
sha; Ambarisha; Kukura; the immensely illustrious Ravata; rajarshi Muchukunda; Chitrabhanu, the performer of
agreeable deeds; King Trasadasyu; Shveta, supreme among rajarshis; the famous Mahabhisha; Nimi; King Ashta-
ka; Ayu; rajarshi Kshupa; King Kaksheyu; Shibi, Ushinara's son; King Gaya; Pratardana; Divodasa; Soudasa, the
lord of Kosala; Ela; rajarshi Nala; Prajapati Manu; Havighna; Prishaghna; Pratipa; Shantanu; Kakshasena; and other rajarshis who have not been named. 'Let me not face obstructions. Let me not suffer from sin. Let there be no
impediments  along  my  path.  Let  my  victory  always  be  certain.  After  death,  let  me  go  to  the  supreme
destination[Stated abruptly, this prayer must be chanted after reciting the names.
 
 ]."'"'