Sanjaya said, "O great king! Radheya again addressed the king of Madra, the scorcher of enemies. He restrained
him and spoke these words. 'O Shalya! You have spoken to me about instances. However, your words are incapable of terrifying me in this battle. Even if all the gods, together with Vasava, fight against me, even then, I will
not be frightened, not to speak of Partha and Keshava. I am incapable of being frightened by words alone. Know
that the person you are capable of terrifying in a battle is someone else. O evil-minded one! You have spoken a lot
of harsh words to me. That is the strength of inferior people. You are incapable of comprehending my qualities. O
venerable one! Karna was not born so as to be frightened. I have been born for valour and for fame. O lord of
Madra! Listen attentively to what I had heard in Dhritarashtra's presence. Honouring Dhritarashtra, brahmanas recounted the ancient and wonderful accounts of many kingdoms and many kings. An aged one, foremost among
brahmanas, recounted ancient tales and spoke these words of ill repute about those from the lands of Bahlika and
Madra. "They are cast out from the region of the Himalayas and are despised in the region of the Ganga. That is
also true of those who live in the central regions, around the Sarasvati, the Yamuna and Kurukshetra, the five
rivers[The five rivers of the Punjab.] and with Sindhu as the sixth. It is one's dharma to avoid the impure Bahlikas, who are outside these regions. From the days of my youth, I remember that the kings of their lineage had a fig tree named Govardhana and
a quadrangular spot named Subhanda near the gate[It is not evident why this should be reprehensible. It is sometimes suggested that the quadrangular spot was for
slaughtering cattle and Subhanda was a store for liquor. Though possible, this doesn't follow.]. Because of some secret work, I had to live with the
Bahlikas then. Because I dwelt among them, their conduct is known to me. There is a city named Shakala, a river
named Apaga that flows downwards and a lineage of the Bahlikas named Jartika[While the Bahlikas were originally from Bactria, there was a settlement around Punjab. Shakala is identified
with Sialkot. The river Apaga is identified as Chandrabhaga (Chenab). Jat is believed to be derived from Jartika.
The Madras lived in close proximity to the Bahlikas.]. Their conduct is severely
censured. They drink liquor made from grain and molasses. They eat the flesh of cows, laced with garlic. They eat
bread mixed with meat and fried barley that has not been sowed[That is, the barley has been bought from others.]. They are devoid of good conduct. Intoxicated,
the women throw away their garments and laugh, sing and dance in the cities, and outside the walls, without garlands and unguents. Intoxicated, they sing many songs, in voices that are like those of asses and camels. They
freely summon others[To acts of intercourse.]. When their husbands and lords are killed, they call out their names in intoxication and
say, 'Alas! Alas!' However, those wicked ones do not observe sacred occasions and continue to scream and dance.
A chief among the Bahlikas lived among those women who made such uproar, and then dwelt for some time in
Kurujangala. Cheerless in his mind, he said, 'She is large and fair[This is a reference to his mistress.]. She is attired in a thin blanket. When it is
time for lying down, she must be thinking about the Bahlika who now lives among the Kurus. When will I cross
the river Shatadru and the beautiful Iravati and go to my own country, where I will see those handsome women
with large bodies? Those fair women have circles of red arsenic on their limbs and black collyrium on their
heads[The red arsenic is probably on their foreheads and the collyrium on their eyes.]. Those beautiful ones are attired only in skins and are sporting. When will I obtain happiness among
those intoxicated ones, who have the sounds of asses, camels and mules? There will be the sounds of drums, kettledrums and conch shells. There is joy in the forest paths there, full of shami, pilu and karira trees. I will live
amongst those who eat cakes ground with wheat and coarse meal. When will I be prosperous and strong along
those paths, which echo to the many sounds of our oppression and banditry[The idea is that the Bahlikas are robbers and bandits. They descend on passers-by along those forest paths and
rob them.]?' The evil-souled Bahlikas are inferior and outcasts in this way. Which man would like to and dwell amidst them, even for an instant?" Thus did the
brahmana describe the Bahlikas, whose conduct is vile. Whether it is their good qualities or bad, you possess one-
sixth of those. Having said this, the virtuous brahmana began to speak again. This is what he said about the ill-
mannered Bahlikas. Listen. "In the large city of Shakala, a rakshasa lady always used to sing every night, on the
fourteenth day of the dark lunar fortnight[Krishna chaturdashi.], to the sound of drums. When will those songs be announced and
when will I sing in Shakala again[It is a bit odd for the brahmana to say this. It will soon be clear that this is actually a quote.]? When will I satiate myself with the flesh of cows and drink the great liquor
made from molasses? Having drunk the liquor made from molasses, I will be with the large and ornamented
women. I will wash my mouth after eating copious quantities of the meat of sheep, laced with onions, and also the
flesh of boars, fowl, cows, asses and camels. Those who do not eat the flesh of sheep, are born in vain." Drunk
with liquor, thus do the residents of Shakala, young and old, cry out. How can there be good conduct among them?
O Shalya! Know this and be surprised. I will tell you more. This is what another brahmana told us in the assembly
of the Kurus. "There is a forest of pilu trees in the spot where the five rivers flow-Shatadru, Vipasha, Iravati as
the third, Chandrabhaga and Vitasta. As the sixth, Sindhu flows outside that region. There is a country named Arat-
ta[There is speculation about the location of Aratta, the name also occurring in Sumerian stories.] there, where dharma has been destroyed. One should not go there. The gods, the ancestors and the brahmanas do not receive offerings from those who are outcasts, those born from servants and those from the land of
Videha[The Critical edition may have erred here. Non-critical versions say Bahlika, which fits the context more than
Videha.], who do not sacrifice. It has been heard that those from Bahlika have destroyed all dharma." The
learned brahmana also said this in the assembly of the virtuous. "Bahlikas eat from vessels made out of wood and
clay, in which, coarse meal has been ground and which have been licked by dogs. They have no revulsion at this.
They drink the milk of sheep, camels and asses. They drink and eat preparations made from these. Inter-caste sons
are born there and those contemptible ones drink every kind of milk and eat everything. The learned say that the
Bahlikas known as Aratta must always be avoided." O Shalya! You are certain to know this. But I will tell you
more. In the gathering of the Kurus, in the assembly hall, another brahmana said the following. "Having drunk
milk in the spot known as Yugandhara, how can one go to the place without decay? Having bathed in Bhutilaya,
how can one go to heaven? That is the spot where five rivers issue from the mountains and flow. A noble person
should not dwell among the Aratta-Bahlikas for even two days. In Vipasha, there are two pishachas named Bahi
and Hlika. They were not created by Prajapati, and the Bahlikas are their offspring. One must avoid those without
dharma-Karashkaras, Mahishakas, Kalingas, Kikatas, Atavis, Karkotakas and Virakas." He had gone on a tirtha
and had spent a single night under a shami tree[This is a reference to the brahmana, who was addressed by the rakshasi.]. He was addressed by a rakshasi, whose hips were as broad as a
mortar. "Those from the land known as Aratta, the people known as Bahlika and those who reside in the SindhuSouvira region are generally reviled[This seems to be the rakshasi speaking.]." O Shalya! You are certain to know this. But I will tell you more. Listen
with an attentive mind to everything that is spoken by me. On an earlier occasion, a skilled brahmana came to our
house as a guest. Witnessing our conduct, the skilled one was delighted and said, "I have lived for a long time on a
single peak of the Himalayas. I have seen many different countries, where diverse kinds of dharma are followed.
But I have never seen a country where all the subjects act against dharma. All of them professed dharma to be
what those learned in the Vedas have proclaimed it to be. I have always travelled in many countries, where different kinds of dharma are followed. O great king! However, having gone to the Bahlikas, I learnt the following.
There, one first becomes a brahmana and then becomes a kshatriya. Thereafter, one becomes a vaishya, a shudra, a
Bahlika, and finally a barber. Having become a barber, one once again becomes a brahmana. Having become a
brahmana there, one is once again born as a slave. In every family, there is only one virtuous brahmana. Everyone
else follows one's desires. The Gandharas, the Madrakas and the Bahlikas possess limited intelligence. That is
what I heard there, about the admixture of dharma. Having travelled throughout the entire earth, I heard about this
catastrophe among Bahlikas." O Shalya! You are certain to know this. But I will tell you more. These were the
censorious words that another one spoke to me about the Bahlikas. In earlier times, a virtuous lady was abducted
by some bandits from Aratta. They displayed adharma towards her. Consequently, she cursed them. "I am young. I
have relatives. But against dharma, you have had intercourse with me[The bandits raped her.]. Therefore, all the women in your lineages will be ignoble. O worst among men! You will not be able to escape from the consequences of your terrible
act." The Kurus, the Panchalas, the Shalvas, the Matsyas, the Naimishas, the Kosalas, the ones from Kashi, the
Angas, the Kalingas, the Magadhas and the immensely fortunate Chedis know about eternal dharma. In many
countries, even those who have outwardly deviated know about virtue. Among the Matsyas, those from the lands
of Kuru and Panchala and especially those from Naimisha and Chedi, the virtuous ones lived according to ancient
dharma. But this is not true of the Madras from the land of the five rivers. They are false in their tongues. O king!
Knowing all this about dharma, be quiet. O Shalya! Be like those who cannot speak. You are the protector and the
king of those people. Therefore, you have one-sixth share in their good and evil deeds. Or else, since you do not
protect them, you only have a share in their evil deeds. A king who protects the good deeds of his subjects obtains
a share in those good deeds. In earlier times, the eternal dharma was revered in all countries. But on seeing the
dharma practised in the land of the five rivers, the grandfather[Brahma.] cried, "Shame!" They are outcasts. They are
born from servants. They are the performers of wicked deeds. That is the reason the grandfather condemned the
dharma in the land of the five rivers. Though they followed their own dharma and that of their varna, he did not
honour it[Because the dharma followed was wrong.]. O Shalya! You are certain to know this. But I will tell you more. A rakshasa named
Kalmashapada[Kalmashapada's story has been recounted in Section 11 (Volume 1). In that account, Kalmashapada was a king
who was possessed by a rakshasa.] was about to be submerged in a pond and said, "Begging is filth for a kshatriya. Falsehood is
filth for a brahmana. Bahlikas are the filth of the earth. The women of Madra are the filth among women." When
the traveller of the night[The rakshasa.] was being submerged in the pond, a king saved him. Listen to what he[The rakshasa.] said when
he was asked. "Mlecchas are filth among men. Boxers are filth among mlecchas. Eunuchs are filth among boxers.
Kings who act as officiating priests are the filth among eunuchs. Among kings who act as officiating priests, the
Madrakas are filth. If you do not save me, all of that filth will be yours." The rakshasa spoke those supreme words
as antidote, when a person's valour has been destroyed by the poison of a rakshasa. The Panchalas follow the brahman. The Kouraveyas follow their own dharma. The Matsyas observe truth and the Shurasenas perform sacrifices.
Those from the eastern regions are like slaves and those from the southern regions are contemptible. The Bahlikas
are thieves and those from Surashtra are of mixed breed. Shame on those from Aratta and the land of the five
rivers. They are ungrateful and steal the property of others. They are addicted to drinking liquor and have intercourse with the wives of their preceptors. Those from Panchala, Kuru, Naimisha and Matsya know about dharma.
The aged ones from Kalinga, Anga and Magadha follow the virtuous path of dharma. With the fire god at the forefront, the gods reside in the eastern direction. The south is protected by the ancestors and Yama, the perfomer of
auspicious deeds. The west is protected by Varuna, who takes care of other powerful gods there. The illustrious
Soma is in the north, along with Brahma and the brahmanas. The rakshasas and pishachas are there in the Himalayas and the guhyakas in Gandhamadana. It is certain that Vishnu Janardana protects all the beings in the
world[Through omission, the Bahlikas are not protected by anyone.]. The Magadhas understand signs, the Kosalas from what they see. The Kurus and Panchalas understand
even if the speech is partly uttered, the Shalvas understand only when everything is spoken. Those who live in
mountainous and hilly regions are coarse. O king! The Yavanas know everything, the Shuras especially so. The
mlecchas follow their own signs. Other inferior people understand nothing. The Bahlikas, and not just the
Madrakas, are against anything that has been undertaken. O Shalya! You are like that and you should not venture
to give me a reply. Knowing this, keep quiet. You should not try to contradict me. Do not make me kill Keshava
and Arjuna after I have killed you first.'

' "Shalya said, 'O Karna! Abandoning of the distressed and the sale of wives and sons is prevalent among those
from Anga. You are the lord of that region. Bhishma enumerated the list of rathas and atirathas[This has been described in Section 59 (Volume 4).]. At that time, he
recounted your vices and you were angry. Do not be angry. Brahmanas can be found everywhere. Kshatriyas can
also be found everywhere. O Karna! So can vaishyas and shudras, and women who are virtuous and good in their
vows. Men always sport with other men and laugh at them, trying to hurt each other. In every country, there are
those who are addicted to intercourse. Everyone is always skilled in detecting another one's faults. No one knows
his own faults, or knowing them, is confounded.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Karna did not say anything in reply and Shalya faced the direction of the enemy. Radheya
smiled again and urged him to drive." '
