'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! On seeing that many of my sons are being killed by a single person, what did
Bhishma, Drona and Kripa do in that battle? O Sanjaya! From one day to another, my sons are going to their perdition. O suta! I think that they have been completely overtaken by terrible destiny, since all my sons are being defeated and are never victorious. O son[The word used is tata.]! My sons are in the midst of Bhishma, Drona, the great-souled Kripa,
Somadatta's valiant son, Bhagadatta, Ashvatthama and many other brave and extremely great-souled warriors. Yet
they are being killed in the battle. Other than destiny, what can this be? The evil Duryodhana did not comprehend
the words that I had spoken earlier. O son! He was restrained by me, and by Bhishma and Vidura. So did Gandhari,
always desiring his welfare. But because of his delusion, the wicked one did not understand earlier and is now
reaping the fruits. In this battle, the angry Bhimasena is killing and conveying my insensate sons to Yama's
abode."

'Sanjaya replied, "Kshatta's supreme words were for your own welfare. They have now come true. O lord! You
did not comprehend them then. Vidura had asked you to restrain your sons from the gambling match with the Pandavas and not oppress them. He is a well-wisher with your welfare in mind and spoke truthfully. But you did not
heed his words, like a dying man who refuses good medicine. The words spoken by the virtuous have now come to
be true. Vidura, Drona, Bhishma and other well-wishers spoke beneficial words that were not accepted and the
Kouravas are headed towards destruction. O lord of the earth! All of this is the consequence of what transpired earlier. Now listen to the account of the battle, exactly as it unfolded. It was midday and an extremely great and terrible encounter commenced. O king! There was destruction of men. Listen, as I describe it. On the instructions of
Dharma's son, all the soldiers were enraged and attacked Bhishma, wishing to kill him. O great king! Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, maharatha Satyaki, together with their armies, advanced against Bhishma. In that encounter,
Arjuna, Droupadi's sons and Chekitana united and advanced against the kings who were following Duryodhana's
command. The brave Abhimanyu, Hidimba's maharatha son and Bhimasena were enraged and attacked the
Kouravas. The Pandavas divided themselves into three parts and fought against the Kouravas. O king! The
Kouravas also began to kill the enemies in battle.

'"Drona, best among rathas, angrily advanced against and fought with the Somakas and the Srinjayas, despatch-
ing them to Yama's eternal abode. O king! When they were slaughtered in battle by the archer who was Bharadvaja's son, a great lamentation arose among the great-souled Somakas. Drona killed many kshatriyas in that battle.
They were seen to be unconscious, like men afflicted with disease. There were groans, moans and shrieks in that
field of battle. There were continuous sounds, like those uttered by men overcome with hunger. The immensely
strong and angry Bhimasena was like terrible death amidst the Kouraveyas and caused carnage. In that great battle,
soldiers killed each other. A terrible river began to flow, with waves of blood. O great king! That battle between
the Kurus and the Pandavas was great and assumed a terrible form. It extended Yama's kingdom. In particular,
Bhima was incited with rage in that battle. He descended on the army of elephants and despatched them to the land
of the dead. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Elephants were struck by Bhima's iron arrows. Some of them
fell down. Others were paralysed. Others shrieked. Still others ran away in different directions. O venerable one!
Great elephants had their trunks sliced off, their feet sliced off. Terrified, they shrieked like cranes. They fell down
on the ground. Nakula and Sahadeva attacked the army of horses. The horses possessed golden harnesses. Their
caparisons were made out of gold. They were seen to be slain in hundreds and thousands. O king! The earth was
strewn with horses that had fallen down. Some lost their tongues. Others could not breathe. Still others shrieked in
agony and lost their lives. O best of men! The earth was beautiful with horses of many different forms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O lord of the earth! The earth looked resplendent, yet terrible, because in that encounter, Arjuna also killed many horses. O king! There were broken chariots, shattered standards, extremely dazzling umbrellas, golden necklaces, bracelets, heads with earrings, loosened headdresses, pennants and the beautiful
floors, yokes and reins of chariots everywhere. The earth was as beautiful as spring with its flowers. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The Pandus were also confronted with this kind of destruction when the angry Bhishma,
Shantanu's son, Drona, supreme among rathas, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Kritavarma were enraged. And when
those on the other side became angry, those on your side met with decay."'
