Why did Agni not burn the Sharngakas when he consumed the rest of the forest?
Why did Bhurishrava attack Satvata?
Why did Brahma create women?
Why did Brahma instruct Mrityu to destroy all living beings?
Why did Brihadratha not obtain a son to carry forward his lineage despite performing many auspicious rites?
Why did Damayanti decide to perform a svayamvara?
Why did Dhananjaya not fight with Babhruvahana initially?
Why did Dharmaraja Yudhishthira want to follow the words of Bhishma and Govinda?
Why did Dhritarashtra agree with his son Duryodhana?
Why did Drona ask Ekalavya to give him his right thumb as a fee?
Why did Drona want to capture Yudhishthira?
Why did Duhshasana's son strike Abhimanyu when he was deprived of his chariot?
Why did Duryodhana and Shakuni Soubala come to Krishna?
Why did Duryodhana instruct his soldiers to light lamps?
Why did Duryodhana plot against the Pandavas?
Why did Duryodhana refuse Krishna's offer of peace?
Why did Gritsamada become an animal after being cursed by Vasishtha?
Why did Indra need Dadhicha's bones to slay his enemies?
Why did Indra turn Bhangashvana into a woman?
Why did Jayadratha not die when the Pandavas had the opportunity to kill him earlier?
Why did Karna encourage Dhritarashtra's evil-souled son to fight against the Pandavas?
Why did Kashyapa tell Garuda to eat the elephant and the tortoise?
Why did King Dhritarashtra's kingdom begin to decay?
Why did Krishna Dvaipayana perform such severe austerities to obtain a son?
Why did Maheshvara (Shiva) assume the form of a hunter and pierce Muka?
Why did Nriga face hardship after donating cows to brahmanas?
Why did Ourva decide to bring about the destruction of all the worlds?
Why did Pandu decide to leave for the forest after killing the deer?
Why did Parashurama want to fight with Bhishma?
Why did Ravana abduct Sita?
Why did Shakuni retreat during the battle?
Why did Shalva reject Amba after she approached him?
Why did Soudasa become a maneater?
Why did Suparna's wings fall off?
Why did Svayambhu create kings?
Why did Takshaka burn King Parikshit with his poison?
Why did Vishvamitra ask Galava for eight hundred pure-born horses?
Why did Vishvamitra order a rakshasa to enter King Kalmashapada's body?
Why did Yayati fall down from heaven?
Why did the earth swallow up the wheel of Karna's chariot during the battle?
Why did the gods kill the daityas?
Why did the valakhilya sages create another Indra through their austerities?
Why was Dharma born as Vidura due to Mandavya's curse?
Why was Duryodhana smiling after speaking to Panchali?
Why was Jayadratha killed by Arjuna?
