How long did the Pandavas reside in the forest with their people?
How many Kurus did not shed tears when the Pandavas left for the forest?
How many Pandava soldiers did Karna kill with hundreds of sharp arrows?
How many akshouhinis did Duryodhana have?
How many akshouhinis does Yudhishthira have?
How many akshouhinis were on the Kourava side?
How many arms did Kartavirya Arjuna possess?
How many arrows did Arjuna pierce Drona's son with?
How many arrows did Arjuna pierce Jayadratha with?
How many arrows did Ekalavya shoot into the dog's mouth?
How many arrows did Indrajit use to bind Rama and Lakshmana?
How many beings were killed by Arjuna in the forest?
How many brothers did Duryodhana have?
How many brothers of Duryodhana were killed by Bhima in the battle?
How many days did the battle between the Kurus and Pandavas last?
How many divine years did Narada spend in the hermitage of Nara and Narayana?
How many gods were killed by Garuda's wings and beak during their battle?
How many kings assembled at Chitrangada's svayamvara ceremony?
How many quarters are there in brahmacharya?
How many sacred shlokas does the Mahabharata contain?
How many sons did Dhritarashtra's son Duryodhana have?
How many sons of Duryodhana were brave and maharathas?
How many times did Parashurama exterminate kshatriyas from the earth?
How many types of beings are created in the world?
How many types of weapons were used by the soldiers in the battle?
How many warriors surrounded Abhimanyu?
How many years constitute a yuga?
How many years did Arjuna spend in Shakra's abode learning the use of weapons?
How many years did Galava study under Vishvamitra?
How many years did the Pandavas have to spend in exile after losing the gamble?
How old was King Janamejaya when he was instated as the ruler?
In what lineage was Rama born?
What are the names of Yudhisthira's brothers?
What are the three fires on which all the Vedas are established?
Who gave Arjuna the bow Gandiva?
Who is the architect of the demons?
Who was the king of Madra?
Who was the sage Mankanaka?
Who were the first Prajapatis?
