Why did Arjuna and Krishna want to fight all the gods and demons together?
Why did Arjuna come to the Himalayas to see Shiva?
Why did Arjuna decide to observe his vow of brahmacharya?
Why did Arjuna go to see Drupada after hearing that he had been instated as king of Panchala?
Why did Arjuna spare Maya's life?
Why did Ashvatthama suggest that Karna should not fight with Arjuna?
Why did Bhimasena swear to kill Duryodhana's sons in battle?
Why did Bhishma abduct Amba and her sisters?
Why did Bhishma want to kill Partha?
Why did Dhrishtadyumna incite the Pandavas to fight?
Why did Dhrishtadyumna kill Drona, despite his father's words saying not to?
Why did Dhritarashtra ignore his well-wishers and allow the gamble to happen again?
Why did Dhritarashtra not accept Vidura's words of wisdom?
Why did Duryodhana think that if Kunti's son is killed by Drona, he will not be able to obtain victory?
Why did Hanuman want to protect the Pandavas?
Why did Indra command Menaka to go to Vishvamitra's hermitage?
Why did Satyaki want to kill Bhurishrava after his arm was severed?
Why did Shalya always try to rival Arjuna?
Why did Sharmishtha choose to ask Yayati for a boon and have a child with him?
Why did Shringi's son curse King Parikshit?
Why did Shrutayudha attack Arjuna with his club?
Why did Skanda's mothers ask him to give them other offspring?
Why did Uddalaki curse his son Nachiketa?
Why did Ulupi instigate Babhruvahana to fight against his father?
Why did Ushanas praise the goddess?
Why did Vashishtha not give up his forbearance when Nandini was being beaten?
Why did Vidura always ensure happiness for the Pandavas?
Why did Yudhishthira disguise himself as a brahmana and approach Virata?
Why does Duryodhana not want to give land to the Pandavas?
Why does Gandhari lament over Jayadratha's death?
Why was Dhananjaya struck by desire when he saw Chitrangada, the king's daughter?
Why was Drona angry with Drupada?
Why was Karna firm in his hatred for Yudhishthira?
Why were Madri's sons eager to see their mother at the hermitage?
